


Nicola Laura Kaye  (born 11 February 1980) is a New
Zealand politician who served as Deputy Leader of the New Zealand National Party
 and Deputy Leader of the Opposition
 from 22 May 2020
 to 14 July 2020
.





Kaye served as the member of the New Zealand Parliament
 for the Auckland Central
 electorate from 2008 until 2020.
In January 2013, she was appointed to the Cabinet  by
Prime Minister John Key , giving her the portfolios of Food Safety,
Civil Defence , and Youth Affairs
, and Associate Minister of Education and
Immigration. In September 2016 she took sick leave from the House of
Representatives for breast cancer  treatment
 and returned to Parliament in early 2017 to
resume full duties. 

Kaye announced on 16 July 2020 she was leaving politics at the 2020 general
election .


EARLY LIFE



Kaye was born in Auckland  and grew up in Epsom
 and Kohimarama .
 Kaye's parents separated when she was seven
years old. Her family includes a brother and sister, "two half-brothers, four
half-sisters, one stepbrother and two step-parents".

She was educated at Victoria Avenue Primary School, Remuera Intermediate School
, and Corran School  (where she
was Head Prefect ), before earning a science degree
 in genetics  from the University of Otago
, where she also began her Bachelor of Laws
, later completing it in Wellington .
 


Kaye is an accomplished competitive athlete, having been the Auckland Women's
3,000 m running champion in 1997, and has raced in numerous marathons and
multi-sport events. In 2008 Kaye competed in the Coast to Coast
 multi-sport event. In February 2013, Kaye completed
the Coast to Coast race a second time, becoming the first New Zealand Cabinet
 Minister to do so.[citation needed
]

In 1997, Kaye participated in a television documentary called Fish out of Water,
in which she and five other teenagers were marooned on Rakitu Island (off Great
Barrier Island ) and fended for themselves for eight
days.  The documentary footage was located
in March 2014 and was published on New Zealand on Air's on-line archive NZ On
Screen  as part of its "before they were famous" series.


Kaye joined the National Party in 1998, becoming women's vice-chair of the
southern region of the New Zealand Young Nationals
. She is a former International Vice-Chairman of
the International Young Democrat Union
. 

Kaye began working for Bill English  in the office of the Leader
of the Opposition  in 2002 as a policy
 researcher. In 2003 she travelled to the United Kingdom
, where she worked as a policy officer and project manager at
the London boroughs  of Enfield 
and Bromley , and then at Transport for London
, where she managed a disabled people transport program,
before working as an IT  project manager
 at the Halifax Bank of Scotland
. 

In 2006, Kaye co-founded a website, networkme.com, and acts as Director of
Communications for that company.]


MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT




Kaye returned to New Zealand in late 2007 to contest the National Party
candidacy for the Auckland Central electorate
. Standing against three other
nominees, Kaye was considered[by whom?
] an
outsider in a close selection battle against sitting list MP Jackie Blue
 for the nomination. 

Kaye worked full-time as the National Party candidate from the time of her
selection. She campaigned on improving public transport 
infrastructure, improving marine protection around Great Barrier Island
, and taking a greater interest in small businesses in
Auckland. During her campaign she knocked on 10,000 doors.


At the general election on 8 November 2008
, Kaye was elected as National's MP for
Auckland Central, defeating incumbent Labour  MP
Judith Tizard . This was greeted[by whom?
] as one of
the most significant upsets of the 2008 general election
, breaking a 90-year hold by left-wing
 parties over the seat; Kaye became the first ever
National MP for the electorate.]


FIRST TERM

As an MP, Kaye has, amongst other things, supported applications for the New
Zealand Cycle Trail  fund for routes in urban
Auckland , on Waiheke Island  and Great Barrier
Island  (the latter two islands being in her electorate
as well).  In early 2010, she
broke with the National Party's policy of encouraging mining in conservation
land, including on Great Barrier – claiming long connections to the island, and
fitting in with her known support for environmental causes. She had noted during
her maiden speech in parliament that "Our environment is the greatest gift we
have been given as a nation", and that economical considerations, especially of
the short term, should not trump this. 
Kaye is a supporter of reinstating trams for Auckland
, and has called for a feasibility study into
extending the new Wynyard Loop. 

She holds up former National MP Katherine Rich  as one of her
role models.  Kaye's own policies, placing
her in the socially liberal wing of the National Party,
 have been criticised by some people in her
own party, where some have called her a "high maintenance backbencher
". Others have called her "obsessive", or, in a more positive
vein, "driven".  However, commentators
have argued that her stance is unlikely to hurt her in her marginal electorate,
which has traditionally voted Labour. 

Kaye was elected the deputy chair of the Government Administration Select
Committee in February 2011. In her first parliamentary term, she also sat on the
Local Government and Environment Select Committee and the Auckland Governance
Legislation Select Committee. Through her time in Parliament on these committees
she has been heavily involved in the review of the Resource Management
(Simplifying and Streamlining) Amendment Bill and legislation creating the
Auckland Council . 

In May 2011, Kaye appeared in an episode of the TVNZ  series Make the
Politician Work. The episode featured Kaye working a shift on a rubbish
collection route and highlighted her campaign for waste minimisation in
Auckland. 

At the 2011 election , Kaye stood again in
Auckland Central in a high-profile race to retain the seat. She was challenged
for the seat by Labour list MP Jacinda Ardern  and Green
 candidate Denise Roche ,
and was placed at position 33 on the National Party list. She defeated Ardern,
although her majority was halved to 717, her share of the vote increased to
45.39%, due to significant strategic voting by Green Party voters supporting
Ardern for the electorate vote. 


SECOND TERM

Following the 2011 election, Kaye was elected Chair of Parliament's Education
and Science Select Committee. During this time, despite a minority of Government
members on the Committee, she managed to progress a significant number of
inquiries and pieces of legislation through the House process.
 At the end of 2012 the Education and Science Select
Committee completed an inquiry into 21st Century Learning Environments and
Digital Literacy, which Kaye championed. 

Kaye was instrumental in bringing a gay pride event back to Auckland,
 where there is a significant LGBT  community
in her electorate. In 2012 she worked with Green MP Kevin Hague on a private
member's bill  to reform adoption and surrogacy laws,
which was introduced to Parliament that year.  In
August 2012, Kaye successfully led the campaign within the National Party to
retain the alcohol purchase age at 18, despite significant support from
parliamentary colleagues to raise the purchase age.


On 29 August 2012 Kaye delivered a speech at Parliament in favour of Louisa Wall
's Marriage (Definition of Marriage) Amendment Act 2013
, which she voted for
through all stages. This was met with positive reception from members of the
LGBT community.]


THIRD TERM AND PROMOTION TO CABINET MINISTER

at her swearing-in as a Cabinet Minister, 2013

On 22 January 2013 Kaye was appointed by Prime Minister John Key to the Cabinet
of New Zealand   and
was appointed as Minister for Food Safety, Minister of Civil Defence
 and Minister of Youth Affairs
, along with being made the Associate
Minister of Education and Associate Minister of Immigration.
 

After the 2014 general election , Kaye was
appointed Minister for ACC,  while retaining her
other portfolios, except Food Safety and Associate Immigration.
 In 2016 she took leave from Parliament and her
ministerial duties while being treated for breast cancer.
 She returned to Parliament in early 2017 to resume
full duties. 

In the 2017 election  Kaye retained the
Auckland Central electorate in the 2017 election, but National became an
opposition party.


NATIONAL PARTY DEPUTY LEADER

Main article: May 2020 New Zealand National Party leadership election


In May 2020, there was a challenge to the National Party leadership
, where Todd Muller
 sought to replace Simon Bridges  as leader of
the National Party. The media reported days ahead of the vote that Kaye was
understood to be Muller's running mate and was seeking to become the party's
deputy leader, but she refused to confirm if she would stand, with news articles
referring to her as the "presumed" candidate even hours before the vote.
 
 On 22 May 2020 the party parliamentary caucus
elected both Muller as leader and Kaye as deputy leader.


On 25 May 2020, she incorrectly described Paul Goldsmith
 as Māori  when defending the
diversity of Muller's Shadow Cabinet. 


On 2 July 2020, Kaye assumed the Women's portfolio within Todd Muller's shadow
cabinet  after former Deputy Leader Paula
Bennett  announced that she would not be contesting the 2020
New Zealand general election .
 

Following Todd Muller's resignation as National Party leader, Kaye became acting
(interim ) leader for several hours.
 Later that day, Judith Collins 
was elected to succeed Muller, and Gerry Brownlee  replaced
Kaye. 

Kaye announced that she was leaving politics two days later. Her resignation
took effect at the October 2020 general election
. 