


Bremen Castings, Inc (BCI) is a 4th generation family owned manufacturer of
machined complete gray & ductile iron castings for heavy truck, valves & pipe
fittings, pump components, compressors, lawn/garden equipment, and military
contract work. BCI is headquartered in Bremen, Indiana .




HISTORY



Bremen Gray Iron Foundry was founded on March 17, 1939 by Ellis Brown, Charles
W. Kling, and Harold Heckamen. The foundry originally produced fire pots, stove
parts, furnace, shaker, and laundry grates for its customers. Suppliers included
Hurwich Iron where they purchased cupola/steel materials, I.O. Pfeiffer
Construction who helped build the foundry and install equipment, and Koontz
Hardware where various supplies were purchased. All of these early suppliers are
still in business today and continue to have close relationships with BCI.


In 1972, the company changed its name to Bremen Castings, Inc.


Starting in the mid-1990s, Bremen Castings started to expand beyond casting. The
foundry's machine shop opened in 1996 and the tool shop opened in 2009.


BCI Defense began in December 2012  and
currently manufacturers firearms and Firearm  parts from 7075
aluminium alloy , 
specifically the AR-15 style rifle .
 
 


MACHINING



In 1996 BCI launched its own internal machine shop with the new addition of a
15,000-square-foot (1,400 m2) facility to the existing foundry with the
expectations to diversify across many markets. This forced quality and
engineering to grow to be diverse in both machining and foundry. This gives BCI
the advantage for both departments to communicate before the product launch for
a lower total start up cost. BCI purchased its first CNC  machines in
1996 and now has over 17 CNC machines in its arsenal.

BCI continues to grow. In 2011 BCI opened its 55,000 SFT facility to house all
machine centers and host all assemblies.

Bremen Castings also creates prototypes using solidification software and runs
solidification simulations as a means of scrap reduction.


FOUNDRY



Bremen Castings foundry produces castings made from recycled materials such as
plate and structural steel and old cast products. A Cupola and medium frequency
furnaces are used at the foundry for melting recycled materials to be poured
into green sand molds produced by match plate molding machines. Once the metal
has been cast and shaken out, the products flow through the state of the art
cleaning room (mill room) then on its way to the CNC machining centers.


ENGINEERING



To help design casting models, BCI also creates prototypes and production models
using MagmaSoft solidification software. The engineers are able to pre-determine
scrap issues prior to production with solidification simulations and as a result
they have been able to reduce the amount of scrap produced at start up of a new
product launch.

The engineers at Bremen Castings are a full production staff handling product
design, steel weldment conversions and existing products. All tooling and
fixtures can be designed and built in house. BCI Engineering software consists
of: MagmaSoft Solidification software, Vero Software  (Visi),
and CAD/CAM/CAE software for aiding the design and manufacturing process.


STATUS QUO SUCKS



The Status Quo Sucks (SQS) team was created to lead BCI in its goal to implement
Lean Practices and eliminate waste throughout the organization. By incorporating
a cultural change to a team concept, each individual at BCI has an ownership of
sustainability and improvement with everything the employee touches. When the
SQS team launches an improvement project, a well rounded team is assembled and a
problem or situation is strategically attacked and resolved through a group
effort.


RECYCLING



BCI has been Bremen's  largest recycling plant and product
producer by weight. In an effort to reduce paper usage and to increase
productivity, BCI has adopted a paperless office  policy,
and as of 2011, BCI has eliminated 85% of paper waste through technology such as
iPad , iPhone , iPod , floor monitors, and
electronic filing cabinet software.