


Alexander Moosbrugger (born 21 August 1972 in Bregenzerwald )
is an Austrian Composer , living since 2001 in Berlin .




BIOGRAPHY



Alexander Moosbrugger completed studies at the Vorarlberger Landeskonservatorium
(organ and harpsichord), at the Universität Wien 
(Philosophy) and at the Staatliche Hochschule für Musik und Darstellende Kunst
Stuttgart .


CHARACTERISTIC MUSICAL CONCERNS



Moosbrugger's work encompasses a fine differentiation of the entire soft dynamic
range. He primarily is writing in chamber ensemble settings, rarely doubled,
preferring among other genres the string quartet. In the foreground of a
composition Moosbrugger interweaves auditory and non-auditory sources,
establishing musical relations through translations of historical,
sociopolitical and private points of reference, analysis of symbolic functions,
the devising of intonations, and "reconceived instrumental practices". Playing
techniques manifest the "speaking" of musical images and are devised anew in
each piece, or series of works. 

His compositions are internationally played, for example in the Konzerthaus
Berlin  or at King's College, Cambridge
, in festivals of contemporary music (2013 at the
London Ear Festival,  Forum Neue Musik
Luzern) and in ensemble concert series. 
Among interpreters of his music are Klangforum Wien ,
ensemble recherche , Ensemble Phoenix Basel,
Kammerensemble Neue Musik Berlin , Ensemble
Cairn Paris, musikFabrik , Ensemble L'arsenale, das Arditti
String Quartet , Pellegrini Quartet
, Herbert Henck.


WORKS


    taken from the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili  in the
   translation by Joscelyn Godwin  and Thomas Reiser
    (2021) 
    clarinet, percussion, piano, violin and violoncello ,
   fonds and turntable (2012-2013)
      de Grigny, transcribed for ensemble – oboe, clarinet, bassoon, trumpet,
   trombone, tuba, string quartet (2010)
    Ménilmontant, Saint-Sulpice, La Trinité (2010)
       confetti shooters (2008)
      violoncello, percussion, 8 medicine ball players (2007)
      (scordatura C/G1), percussion (2005)
      flute, soprano, clarinet, percussion, church bells (St. Gallus, Bregenz),
   ensemble on period instruments for early music (baruque trumpet, violin,
   viola, violoncello, theorbo), ensemble with 12 players (flute, oboe,
    bassoon, French horn, cornetto, trombone, percussion, violin 1,
   violin 2, viola, violoncello, contrabass), MIDI controlled organ pipe D 32’
   (2001)


RESEARCH AND CURATORIAL PROJECTS



Moosbrugger's concern with "Listening/Hearing" as compositional arena motivated
studies in philosophy at the Universität Wien . Since then,
he researches and works with aspects of hearing as sounding reflections about
the history of philosophy.  For the
Orpheus Instituut in Ghent Moosbrugger led „Gespräche zum Hören“ with Rebecca
Saunders , Georg Friedrich Haas  and
Salvatore Sciarrino .
 Teaching and guest lectures at the Anton
Bruckner Privatuniversität 
 and Universität der Künste Berlin
. 

Moosbrugger initiated and curated the festival reihe 0 – Tage aus Kunst from
2000 until 2008, and since 2007 is Artistic Director of the Bludenzer Tage
zeitgemäßer Musik .


AWARDS, RECOGNITION



Alexander Moosbrugger has received divers stipendia, among them the
International Bodenseepreis Sparte Zeitgenössische Komposition, the Austrian
state stipend for composition as well as the composition prize of the Land
Vorarlberg.  Moosbrugger was Artist in
Residence in the Domus Artium near Rome and resident artist in the Centro
Tedesco di Studi Veneziani. 