


Preved (Russian : Преве́д) is a term used in the
Padonkaffsky jargon , a meme  in the
Russian-speaking Internet  which developed out of a
heavily circulated picture, and consists of choosing alternative spellings for
words for comic effect. The picture, a modified version of John Lurie
's watercolor  Bear Surprise ,
whose popularity was stoked by emails and blogs, features a man and a woman
having sex in the clearing of a forest, being surprised by a bear calling
"Surprise!" with its paws raised. In later Russian adaptations, the bear shouts
"Preved!" (a deliberate misspelling of privet, приве́т – "hi!"). In keeping with
a popular trend of image manipulation , the iconic bear — dubbed
Medved ] (Russian :
Медвед), a misspelling of медведь ("bear") — has been inserted into many other
pictures where his appearance adds a new dimension to the joke.

jargon used in graffiti  in the
city park  of Aalst, Belgium 
poster for the Russian edition of Newsweek
 magazine features its chief editor Leonid Parfyonov
 crying "Preved" with the Preved bears flying on the
background

The word and the bear image have found their way into the mainstream mass media,
such as a poster for the Russian edition of Newsweek .

Eventually, it has become known that the author of the altered picture with the
word "preved" was user Lobzz from site Dirty.ru, real name Roman Yatsenko. The
authorship of the word itself is still unclear, although the "unfinished"
version, "prevet" was traced to 2003. 

Preved is identified by a specific pattern of alternative spelling which emerged
from the word. In this pattern, voiceless consonants  are
replaced with their voiced counterparts, and unstressed 
vowels are interchanged pair-wise – a and o stand in for each other, as do e and
i. The words уча́снег (uchasneg) (a misspelling of участник (uchastnik), "user"
or "participant"), preved itself, and кагдила (kagdila) (a misspelling of как
дела (kak dela), "how are you") illustrate this pattern.

The larger trend of alternative spellings, called "olbansky yazyk" ("Olbanian
language ", misspelled "Albanian") developed from the
padonki  movement which originated on sites such as udaff.com. That
trend uses the opposite conversion from the Preved trend – voiced consonants are
replaced with their voiceless counterparts (which are sometimes doubled). For
vowels, o is replaced with a and e with i. For example, áвтор (ávtor, "author")
would be spelled áффтар (áfftar) or áфтар (áftar). The latter exhibits a sort of
eye dialect .


"MEDVED" IN POLITICS



In Russian, MEDVED (Russian : МЕДВЕД) is an abbreviation of
the name of the Interregional Unity Movement 
(Russian : Межрегиональное Движение Единство) - a
pro-government movement that formed a faction in the 3rd State Duma
 (1999-2002), long before the appearance of the Internet
meme.  The movement's logo featured a brown bear. In
2002, the Interregional Unity Movement merged into the newly-formed United
Russia  party. United Russia adopted the Unity bear logo, later
changing its color from brown to white.  This, along
with the Internet meme, influenced the fact that the word "medved" is often
associated with Dmitry Medvedev , President of Russia from
2008 to 2012. 

During an internet conference with Russian President Vladimir Putin
 on 6 July 2006, during which all interested Runet 
users asked him questions through a Yandex  portal, the question
"PREVED, Vladimir Vladimirovich! How do you feel about MEDVED?" received the
largest number of votes (28,424).  This event played a
significant role in the "Preved-Medved" meme gaining fame and popularity even
among those who rarely use the Internet.  In the end,
the question was not asked to Putin (the organizers considered this and some
other questions to be a flash mob ); the question "How do you feel
about the Medved'  magazine?" was
asked instead. Some representatives of non-Russian press took the original
"Medved" question literally; in particular, Associated Press
 reportedly interpreted it as a reference to then-deputy
prime minister Dmitry Medvedev . 



SEE ALSO


 * Eye dialect 