


Mary Frances Vivian Lobb (1878 – 1939) was an English Land Army 
volunteer and life companion to the English designer May Morris 
for 22 years.




EARLY LIFE


Lobb was companion to May Morris who is shown in this
photograph taken in 1909.

Mary Francis Vivian Lobb was born in New Malden , Surrey in
1878. : 278  Her parents were Nicholas William
Lobb and Emma Vivian Lobb, and she was the second of their five children.
 Lobb grew up in Penerthwin and was educated at St.
Thomas College in Launceston. 


PERSONAL LIFE



Lobb was a Land Girl , or Land Army
volunteer, in World War I . In 1917 Lobb met May Morris, who was
living at Kelmscott Manor, which had been her father William Morris' country
retreat.   Morris had
had two relationships with men that had failed before meeting Lobb.
 Lobb moved in, initially serving as a gardener.
 Lobb and Morris would spend the rest of their lives
together.  Lobb was known for wearing sturdy
clothes, with a Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers. 
Evelyn Waugh  described Lobb as a 'hermaphrodite
'  and George Bernard Shaw
 also described Lobb in negative terms.
 As time passed, Lobb and Morris traveled through
Europe, including visits to Iceland  and Gwbert
 in Wales. : 281 

May Morris died in 1938, leaving £12,000 to Mary Lobb and tenure of Kelmscott
Manor, where Lobb remained until her death the following year.
 : 281 Following
Morris' death some of the objects in Kelmscott Manor were auctioned off.
 Lobb donated the jewellery that Morris had left to
her to Victoria and Albert Museum  in London,
 and gave the city of Exeter, England  her
Icelandic artifacts  which included a drinking
horn. 


DEATH



Lobb died of heart disease in 1939. : 298  Her
will stipulated she was to have no coffin, only a plain oblong box.
 She was cremated; her wish was for her ashes to be
"scattered on a Cornish Moor preferably Bosporthennis 
Manor".  She left her notebooks to the National
Library of Wales  in Aberystwyth
. 

In 2017, the Kelmscott Manor Museum had an exhibit centered on Lobb.
