
 ˚ redirects here. For similar symbols, see Circle symbol (disambiguation) .
 A ring diacritic  may appear above or below letters. It may be combined with some letters  of the extended Latin alphabets  in various contexts.
 This article needs additional citations for verification . (April 2020)



 RINGS



 DISTINCT LETTER
 The character Å  (å) is derived from an A  with a ring. It is a distinct letter  in the Danish , Norwegian , Swedish , Finnish , Walloon , and Chamorro  alphabets. For example, the 29-letter Swedish alphabet begins with the basic 26 Latin letters  and ends with the three letters Å , Ä , and Ö .

 OVERRING
 name "At the beehives" in Roudnice nad Labem  - Czech Republic
 The character Ů (ů) a Latin U  with overring, or kroužek  is a grapheme  in Czech  preserved for historic reasons, which identifies a vowel shift . For example, the word for "horse" used to be written kóň, which evolved, along with pronunciation, into kuoň. Ultimately, the vowel  disappeared completely, and the uo evolved into ů, modern form kůň. The letter ů now has the same pronunciation as the letter ú  (long ), but changes to a short o when a word is morphed (e.g. nom. kůň  → gen. koně, nom. dům → gen. domu), thus showing the historical evolution of the language. Ů cannot occur in initial position, while ú occurs almost exclusively in initial position or at the beginning of a word root  in a compound. These characters are used also in Steuer's Silesian alphabet . The  pronunciation has prevailed in some Moravian  dialects, as well as in Slovak , which uses the letter ô  instead of ů.
 The ring is used in some dialects of Emilian  and Romagnol  to distinguish the sound /ʌ/ (å) from /a/ (a).
 ů was used in Old Lithuanian  in Lithuania Minor  from the 16th till the beginning of the 20th century and for a shorter time in 16th-century Lithuania Major  for diphthong .
 The ring was used in the Lithuanian Cyrillic  alphabet promoted by Russian authorities in the last quarter of the 19th century with the letter У̊ / у̊  used to represent the /wɔ/ diphthong (now written uo in Lithuanian orthography).
 ẘ and ẙ are used in the ISO 233  romanization of the Arabic alphabet . A fatḥah followed by the letter ⟨ﻭ⟩ (wāw) with a sukūn (ـَوْ) is romanized as aẘ. A fatḥah followed by the letter ⟨ﻱ⟩ (yā’) with a sukūn over it (ـَيْ) is romanized as aẙ.
 Ring upon e (e̊) is used by certain dialectologists  of Walloon  (especially Jean-Jacques Gaziaux ) to note the /ə/ vowel typically replacing /i/ and /y/ in the Brabant province  central Walloon dialects. The difficulty of type-writing it has led some writers to prefer ë for the same sound.
 Many more characters can be created in Unicode  using the combining character  U+030A ◌̊ COMBINING RING ABOVE, including the above-mentioned у̊ (Cyrillic у with overring) or ń̊ (n with acute and overring).
 The standalone (spacing) symbol is U+02DA ˚ RING ABOVE. The unrelated, but nearly identical degree symbol is U+00B0 ° DEGREE SIGN.
 Although similar in appearance, it is not to be confused with the Japanese handakuten  (U+309A ◌゚ COMBINING KATAKANA-HIRAGANA SEMI-VOICED SOUND MARK), a diacritic used with the kana for syllables starting with h to indicate that they should instead be pronounced with . In Japanese dialectology, handakuten is used with kana for syllables starting with k to indicate their consonant is , with syllables starting with r to indicate their consonant is l though this does not change the pronunciation, with kana u to indicate its morph into kana n, and with kana i to indicate the vowel is to be said as .
 In Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics , there are two ring characters: ᐤ (Cree  and Ojibwe  final w, or Sayisi o) and ᣞ (Cree and Ojibwe final w or final y). This second smaller ring can combine as a diacritic ring above in Moose Cree  and Moose-Cree influenced Ojibwe as a final y; in Inuktitut , the ring above the /_i/ character turns it into a /_aai/ character. In Western Cree, /_w_w/ sequence is represented as ᐝ.
 Unicode has:
                                              
 UNDERRING
 Unicode  encodes the underring at U+0325 ◌̥ COMBINING RING BELOW
 The underring is used in IPA  to indicate voicelessness , and in Indo-European studies  or in Sanskrit  transliteration (IAST ) to indicate syllabicity  of r, l, m, n etc. (e.g. r̥ corresponding to IPA ). R with ring below, L with ring below, R with ring below and macron, and L with ring below and macron were proposed for Unicode because of their use in Sanskrit transliteration and the CSX+ Indic character set .  This proposal was rejected, because they are already encoded as sequences.

 In Pashto  romanization, ḁ is used to represent /ə/.

 Examples:
    EMILIAN
 In Emilian , e̥ can be used to represent unstressed /ə/ in very accurate transcriptions.
 ROMAGNOL
 In Romagnol , e̥ is used to represent /ə/ in diphthongs, e.g. Santarcangelo  dialect ame̥ig  'friend', ne̥ud  'naked'.

 HALF RINGS
 See also: Modifier letter left half ring  and Modifier letter right half ring 
 Half rings also exist as diacritic marks; these are characters U+0351 ◌͑ COMBINING LEFT HALF RING ABOVE and U+0357 ◌͗ COMBINING RIGHT HALF RING ABOVE. These characters are used in the Uralic Phonetic Alphabet , respectively for mediopalatal pronunciation and strong-onset vowels. These characters may be used in the International Phonetic Alphabet , denoting less and more roundedness , as alternatives to half rings below U+031C ◌̜ COMBINING LEFT HALF RING BELOW and U+0339 ◌̹ COMBINING RIGHT HALF RING BELOW. They are here given with the lowercase a: a͑ and a͗, a̜ and a̹.
 U+1E9A ẚ LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH RIGHT HALF RING is similar in appearance but differs from a͗ because its compatibility decomposition  uses U+02BE ʾ MODIFIER LETTER RIGHT HALF RING instead of U+0357 ◌͗ COMBINING RIGHT HALF RING ABOVE.
 Other, similar signs are in use in Armenian : the U+0559 ◌ՙ ARMENIAN MODIFIER LETTER LEFT HALF RING and the U+055A ◌՚ ARMENIAN APOSTROPHE.
 Breve  and inverted breve  are also shaped like half rings, respectively, the bottom and top half of a circle.

 OTHER USES
 The ring is used in the transliteration of the Abkhaz  to represent the letter ҩ. It may also be used in place of the abbreviation symbol ॰ when transliterating the Devanagari  alphabet.

 LETTERS WITH RING

                                     
 SIMILAR MARKS


 The ring as a diacritic mark should not be confused with the dot  or U+0366 ◌ͦ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER O diacritic marks, or with the degree sign °.
 The half ring as a diacritic mark should not be confused with the comma  or ogonek  diacritic marks.