


Canal 2 is a Nicaraguan  free-to-air  television
network  owned by Televicentro de Nicaragua, S.A., owned
by the Mexican  media mogul Remigio Ángel González
. In theory, the channel's sister channels are those
of Grupo Ratensa , but in practice, the channel is an
independent operation with support from the Nicaraguan government.


This article needs additional citations for verification
. (April 2022)




HISTORY



Televicentro de Nicaragua, S.A. was founded in December 1965 by Octavio Sacasa
Sarria and started broadcasting in March 1966. It was the third television
channel in Nicaragua after Channel 6, owned by the Somoza  family.
Televicentro started broadcasting in colour in 1973.

With the triumph of the Sandinista  revolution in July 1979,
Channel 2 together with Channel 6 were expropriated by the Sandinista government
and turned into the Sistema Sandinista de Televisión
 (SSTV), the Sandinista Television System.
Channel 2 returned to its original owners at the end of 1989.

In 1996, Channel 2 became the first Central American TV channel to have an
official web site. Canal 2 also broadcasts from relay-transmitter channel 7 in
some parts of the country.

In 2005, Televicentro signed an agreement with Channel 33 from Costa Rica
 to broadcast the evening transmissions of Noticiero 22-22 in that
country.

In 2006, the channel started streaming broadcasts.

outside van at the Saint Blas Church
at Chichigalpa , 2015

In late 2011, Octavio Sacasa said that "the channel is not for sale", amid
rising concerns that Televicentro's sale to Albavisión was finalized, as other
versions of the same story have been circulating in business circles, about
alleged advanced negotiations between Sacasa and Ángel González. González and
Sacasa were business partners in the USA in the 80s, until becoming arch-rivals
in the early 90s, when Sacasa reassumed control of Televicentro.


In 2014, the channel's news operation (TVNoticias) was taken over by Maurice
Ortega, aligning it with the government's viewpoint.


In 2015, the channel was definitely sold to Albavisión, as an independent
operation from Grupo Ratensa, even though Carlos Pastora from Canal 10 was still
managing the channel. González owned the channel by means of one of his
figurehead subsidiaries, TV Móvil, in what was considered to be another "blow"
to democracy in Nicaragua, and was even condemned by the Nicaraguan Catholic
Church. This maneuver allowed the Ortega-Murillo family to have absolute control
of the television station and expand the number of media outlets, in exchange
for a repeater television frequency for González (channel 7).



PROGRAMMING



As of April 2022: 


NEWSCASTS

    editions at 1:00 p.m., 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. and with short bulletins on
   weekends.
    

FOREIGN SOAP OPERAS

        

FOREIGN TV SERIES

        

REALITYS

     

KIDS

             
                   

TV MOVIES

 

ORIGINAL PRODUCTIONS

 

SPECIAL EVENTS

 

FORMER PROGRAMMING


LOCAL

       

IMPORTED

                 * Contra corriente (serie)