

Not to be confused with the International Court of Justice
.

The International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) is an international human rights
 non-governmental organization
. It is a standing group of 60 eminent
jurists—including senior judges, attorneys and academics—who work to develop
national and international human rights standards through the law. Commissioners
are known for their experience, knowledge and fundamental commitment to human
rights. The composition of the Commission aims to reflect the geographical
diversity of the world and its many legal systems.



The commission is supported by an International Secretariat based in Geneva
, Switzerland , and staffed by lawyers  drawn
from a wide range of jurisdictions and legal traditions. The Secretariat and the
Commission undertake advocacy and policy work aimed at strengthening the role of
lawyers and judges  in protecting and promoting human rights
 and the rule of law .

In addition, the ICJ has national sections and affiliates in over 70 countries.
Given the legal focus of the ICJ's work, membership of these sections is
predominantly drawn from the legal profession.

In April 2013, the ICJ was presented with the Light of Truth Award
 by the Dalai Lama  and the International
Campaign for Tibet . The award is presented
to organisations who have made outstanding contributions to the Tibetan
cause. 

The current ICJ President is Professor Robert Goldman. Former Presidents include
Sir Nigel Rodley  (2012-2017), a former member of the UN Human
Rights Committee , Professor Pedro Nikken
 (2011-2012) and Mary Robinson  (2008-2011),
the former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
 and President of Ireland
.


CURRENT ACTIVITIES



The ICJ is active in promoting human rights and the rule of law, whether at the
international level (e.g. the UN), regionally (e.g. the EU 
and Council of Europe ), or domestically through the
activities of its national sections (e.g. JUSTICE  in the UK).

The ICJ's International Law and Protection Programme works to promote the
application of international law to violations of a civil, political, social or
economic nature.  The
focus is on the international obligations of states to respect, protect, and
fulfill human rights through the Rule of Law, to protect victims of human rights
violations, and to hold states and non-state actors accountable for these
violations and abuses. Today, the specific areas of work include:

     ;
     ;
      .

The ICJ also operates regional programmes of work in Africa , Asia
Pacific , Central America , Europe
, and the Middle East  and North Africa
.  These
focus on promoting and supporting the independence of the judiciary, the Rule of
Law and human rights issues specific to their regional contexts. To support this
work, the ICJ has regional offices in Thailand, South Africa, and Guatemala, and
country office in Nepal and North Africa.


HISTORY



Born at the ideological frontline of a divided post-war Berlin, the ICJ was
established following the 1952 ‘International Congress of Jurists’ in West
Berlin . The Congress was organized by the ‘Investigating Committee of Free
Jurists (ICJF)’, a group of German jurists committed to investigating human
rights abuses carried out in the Soviet Zone of post-war Germany.

During the Congress, delegates decided to make provisions to expand the work of
the ICJF to investigate human rights violations in other regions of the world. A
five-member ‘Standing Committee of the Congress’ was appointed for this purpose
and, in 1953, the Standing Committee created the “International Commission of
Jurists (ICJ)” as a permanent organisation dedicated to the defence of human
rights through the rule of law.

One of the key areas of concern for the 106 Congress delegates was the case of
Dr. Walter Linse , a West German lawyer and the Acting President
of the ICJF. Two weeks prior to the start of the Congress, on 8 July 1952, in an
apparent attempt to intimidate participants, Dr. Linse was abducted by East
German intelligence agents and delivered to the KGB . Despite
international condemnation of the abduction, Dr. Linse was executed in Moscow
 for “espionage” in 1953.[citation needed
]

In 1955, the ICJ issued a report entitled Under False Colours in which it stated
that "the International Association of Democratic Lawyers and its subsidiaries
proceed from a principle which is diametrically opposed to those which form the
basis of the Commission’s work. Although it is careful not to pronounce itself
openly on the subject, the International Association of Democratic Lawyers
defends and supports the principles of Soviet-Communism."

The ICJ was initially partially funded by the Central Intelligence Agency
 through the American Fund for Free Jurists, but
the CIA's role was not known to most of the ICJ's members.
 American founders like
Allen Dulles  and John J. McCloy  conceived it
as a counter to the International Association of Democratic Lawyers
, which had been set up by
leftist French lawyers with connections to the French resistance
.
: 62  Ex-CIA officer
Philip Agee  considered that the ICJ was "set up and controlled
by the CIA for propaganda operations."
 The CIA funding became
public in 1967, but the organization survived the revelations after a period of
reform under Secretary General Seán MacBride , and through Ford
Foundation  funding.

 MacBride himself was
involved in CIA funding, according to information the US government reported.


From 1970 to 1990, Niall MacDermot  was Secretary-General,
succeeding Seán MacBride .
 MacDermot moved
the ICJ away from its association with the CIA, to the forefront of the
international human rights movement.


In 1978, the ICJ established the Centre for the Independence of Judges and
Lawyers (CIJL). It was instrumental in the formulation and adoption of the UN
Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary 
and the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers and its mandate is to work
for their implementation.

In 1980, the ICJ received the European Human Rights Prize
 by Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of
Europe .

In 1986, the ICJ gathered a group of distinguished experts in international law
 to consider the nature and scope of the obligations of
States parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights . The
meeting witnessed the birth of the Limburg Principles on the Implementation of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which
continue to guide international law in the area of economic, social and cultural
rights.

In the 1990s, a number of important international developments took place as a
result of initiatives by the ICJ. These included the UN Declaration on the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the recommendation by
the Programme of Action of the World Conference on Human Rights
 in Vienna to work on the setting up of an
International Criminal Court . This was the
direct result of an international conference on impunity, organised by the ICJ
under the auspices of the United Nations in 1992, which adopted an appeal asking
the Vienna conference to "set up an international penal tribunal…in order to
finally break the cycle of impunity". In November 2006 the ICJ held an
international meeting in Yogyakarta  for LGBT rights
 and published The Yogyakarta Principles
 in March 2007.

The ICJ also initiated the drafting of the set of Principles for the Protection
and Promotion of Human Rights through Action to Combat Impunity and the Basic
Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of
Violations of International Human Rights and Humanitarian Law, both under
examination at the UN Human Rights Commission  and
also received the United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights
 in 1993.


NATIONAL SECTIONS



As at 2015 there are 21 autonomous
 National Sections of the
ICJ.  They are:

                      

CONGRESSES OF THE ICJ



Every few years, the ICJ convenes a World Congress, where jurists from around
the world work together to address a pressing human rights issue and agree
normative principles and objectives in a public Declaration. These Declarations
have frequently been used by inter-governmental bodies, including the United
Nations, as well as bar associations, lawyers, academic centres and other human
rights NGOs around the world. For example, the ICJ was responsible for the
Declaration of Delhi  on the rule of law 
in 1959, which set out the ICJ's conception of the Rule of Law as being
dynamic. 

The ICJ's most recent Declaration, agreed at the ICJ's 17th World Congress in
December 2012, related to Access to Justice and Right to a Remedy in
International Human Rights Systems.
 The full list of ICJ
Congresses is as follows:


    International Human Rights Systems
    & Lawyers in times of crisis
    Combating Terrorism
      of Lawyers
         Pressures
     

SEE ALSO


        
    
 * JUSTICE 