


Sonkhed is a village in Loha  taluka of Nanded district
 in Maharashtra  state of India .






DEMOGRAPHY



Sonkhed is a village with total 1100 families residing. The Sonkhed village has
population of 5995 of which 3110 are males while 2885 are females as per
Population Census 2011.  Average Sex Ratio of
Sonkhed village is 928 which is lower than Maharashtra state average of 929.


Schedule Caste (SC) constitutes 15.60% while Schedule Tribe (ST) were 0.53% of
total population in Sonkhed village. 

Sonkhed village has lower literacy rate compared to Maharashtra. In 2011,
literacy rate of Sonkhed village was 78.08% compared to 82.34% of Maharashtra.
In Sonkhed Male literacy stands at 86.13% while female literacy rate was
69.49%. 


TRANSPORT



It is located 22 km towards South from District headquarters Nanded .
16 km from Loha . 536 km from State capital Mumbai .

There is no railway station in Sonkhed, nearest railway stations are Wanegaon
(17 km), Limbgaon (18 km), Nanded (19 km).
Nearest airport Shri Guru Gobind Singh Ji Airport, Nanded
 is 22 km away.


POLITICS



Sonkhed comes under Nanded South 
for assembly elections of Maharashtra
. Current member of
Maharashtra Legislative Assembly 
representing Sonkhed is Hemant Sriram Patil  of Shiv Sena
 since 2014.  While it comes under Nanded
(Lok Sabha constituency)  for Indian general
elections. Current member of parliament
 representing Sonkhed is Ashok Chavan
 of Indian National Congress  who is
also former Chief Minister of Maharashtra .


CULTURE



Wednesday is the day of weekly market in Sonkhed, hundreds of people from
surrounding villages comes to Sonkhed on weekly market day. Well known Maroti
Temple lie in centre of market place while other temples includes temple of Sant
Tukaram , Goddess Satvaai or Sataamai, Goddess Marimaai. Besides
market place there is grand Mosque for Muslims while Sonkhed also have a
Buddhist Vihara  which is known as Samaaj Mandir. Most of marriages of
local Buddhist people takes place at this Samaaj Mandir.


INSTITUTIONS



Sonkhed is one of major village in Nanded district . It has
Primary health centre  and Police station, both of
which covers 40-60 surrounding small villages. Sonkhed have facility of
education till graduation level and students from surrounding small villages
come to Sonkhed for studies.