


Annemieke Mein (born in 1944 at Haarlem ) is a Dutch-born Australian
textile artist who specialises in depicting wildlife. She was the first textile
artist to be member of Wildlife Art Society of Australasia and the Australian
Guild of Realist Artists. The subjects of her sculpted textiles are birds,
frogs, gum and wattle blossoms, and insects such as moths, dragonflies, wasps
and grasshoppers. Her fondness for insects and her sympathetic images, often
greatly enlarged and showing normally invisible colours and textures, have
revealed new aspects of the everyday world.






This biography of a living person 
needs additional citations  for verification
. (August 2021)


Annemieke was the only child of a father who was a dental technician and a
mother who was a skilled dressmaker, and emigrated to Melbourne 
with her parents in 1951. Initially unable to speak English, she attended
Brighton State School, Mitcham State School and Nunawading High School. She
spent long days of her childhood roaming the outdoors and becoming fascinated by
the extraordinary diversity of Australian wildlife. She sketched and collected
insects, and learnt to breed and raise butterflies.

After finishing school she enrolled for a short-lived art course at Melbourne
State College and then pursued a career in nursing at the Royal Melbourne
Hospital , graduating in 1967. The following year
she married Phillip Mein, a general practitioner she had met at the Hospital,
and in 1971 they moved to Sale  in Gippsland ,
Victoria with their six-month-old daughter, Joanne. Their son, Peter, was born
in 1972. Her work became well-known and she was acclaimed as one of the world's
foremost textile artists. In 1988 she received the Order of Australia Medal
 for services to the arts.

Annemieke holds regular workshops and freely imparts her techniques and
experience to those who attend. She met Charles McCubbin (d. 2010), grandson of
Frederick McCubbin , in 1979. He was one of Australia's
leading naturalists and wildlife artists, and was chief consultant in the
construction of the butterfly house at the Melbourne Zoo . He
wrote and illustrated "Butterflies of Australia" and throughout their
acquaintance shared his knowledge with Annemieke and gave his support.

In 1984 she was commissioned to design and produce six bas-relief 
bronzes for permanent display on a wall of fame  in Sale. The
bronzes featured Alfred William Howitt , Mary Grant
Bruce , Ada Crossley , Allan McLean
, Angus McMillan  and
Nehemiah Guthridge . In 1987 the town fathers of Bendigo
 commissioned a bas-relief of Henry Backhaus , the
first priest to visit the Victorian goldfields . In 2007
Mein was the subject of a major survey exhibition at the Gippsland Art Gallery
, which also holds a large number of her works in its
permanent collection.

Her 1992 book The Art of Annemieke Mein, gives a rare insight into the creative
process that is necessary for producing works of art that delight both the
artist and the viewer. The illustrations offer a comprehensive cross-section of
her textile pieces.

She suffers from cryptogenic sensory neuropathy
, an autoimmune condition
which has made it difficult for her to continue working.


In March 2024 Annemieke will be the subject of a major sixty-year retrospective
exhibition called 'A Life's Work', to be staged at Gippsland Art Gallery
 in the regional town of Sale, Victoria
, which will be accompanied by a new book about her art and
life.