


Brother's Keeper (Chinese : 巨輪; lit. 'big
wheel') is a Hong Kong television  drama serial
produced by Amy Wong  and TVB . It stars Ruco Chan
, Linda Chung , Edwin Siu  and Kristal
Tin  as the main cast of the series. It premiered on 23 September
2013 on TVB Jade  in Hong Kong. The final two episodes aired
back-to-back on Saturday, 2 November 2013. The plot is based on the story of Koi
Kei Bakery , which is also the show's main sponsor.






The serial, set between the years 1980 and 2013, depicts the moral life
struggles of two half-brothers Kiu Tin-seng (Ruco Chan ) and Lo
Wai-son (Edwin Siu ) during the late and post-colonial periods of
Hong Kong  and Macau . Historical events that were set
against this era, including Hong Kong's 1980 Touch Base Policy
, Macau's relaxed immigration laws of 1982, the 1991
goldsmith robberies , the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong
 and Macau
 to China in the late 1990s, the 1998 Hong
Kong financial crisis , the 1999 Macanese triad
 wars, the 2003 Hong Kong SARS outbreak
, and the 2008 Hong Kong financial
recession, serves as some of the key plot vehicles that drive the changing fates
of the brothers and their families.


Development for Brother's Keeper began in mid-2012. A teaser trailer was
unveiled at TVB's 2013 Sales Presentation event, which was held on 8 November
2012. The trailer premiered on TVB Jade on 24 November 2012.
 The serial was also
exhibited as one of eighteen TVB grand television drama productions at the 17th
Hong Kong International Film & TV Market in March 2013.

The sequel, Brother's Keeper II , was released in 2016.


PRODUCTION




FILMING

A costume fitting press conference was held on 19 September 2012, and principal
photography  began in Hong Kong in late September 2012.
A camera commencement blessing ceremony was held on 17 October 2012.

Production relocated to Macau on 21 November 2012.
 On 19 December 2012, the
crew resumed shooting in Hong Kong. The final scenes of the drama were completed
on 1 February 2013. Macau's Koi Kei Bakery is a major sponsor for the serial.



PLOT



Brother's Keeper is a story about two brothers of the same mother but different
fathers, "Sam" Kiu Tin-seng (Ruco Chan) and Lo Wai-son (Edwin Siu). Sam was born
in Hong Kong, the son of Chow Yuk-mui (Louise Lee) and Kiu Sum (Lee Kwok Lun).
Due to Kiu Sum refusing to marry Chow Yuk-mui, Yuk-mui decided to take Sam to
Foshan, China to start anew. In Foshan, Yuk-mui got married with Lo Fu-shing
(Lau Kong) and gave birth to Son a few years afterwards.

Not long after, the family of four decided to cross the border to start a new
life in Hong Kong. The family of four eventually got separated with Sam ending
up in Hong Kong, while Yuk-mui, Fu-shing, and Son ending up in Macau.

The two brothers lived very different lives in the course of the next 20 years.
The very hardworking and ambitious Sam managed to graduate from college and
became a police officer like his biological father, Kiu Sum. He has a girlfriend
named Rachel Cheuk (Linda Chung) whom he is willing to do anything to fulfill
her dreams of opening a fashion store. In order to achieve his goal, he seduces
Fabio (Ankie Beilke) and uses her in the process. In addition, Sam also has an
ambiguous relationship with a triad member named Keung Yung (Louis Cheung) who
later caused Sam to end up in jail.

Son, who is very simple-minded, only wants to live a peaceful and comfortable
life in Macau. He is good friends with Yiu Man-ying (Krystal Tin) and Lung Fei
(Louis Yuen). In order to avoid his abusive father (Fu-shing), Son works with
his mother (Yuk-mui) at a restaurant. The lives of the two brothers, Sam and Son
began to change after they meet up again. The two brothers in the series will go
from 20 to 50 years old. This also shows the phrase "rags to riches" as Son
becomes a rich businessowner from a poor young boy.


CAST AND CHARACTERS




MAIN CAST

    Sam.

Independent, clever, and talented, Sam is a distinguished police officer for the
Royal Hong Kong Police Force , taking him only
five years to get promoted from the sergeant rank to the chief inspector rank.
Sam is Chow Yuk-mui's eldest son, sired by Kiu Sum, who is also a Hong Kong
police officer. Rejected by his biological father, Sam suffers through a
tremendously difficult childhood and is emancipated by his parents at an early
age. Sam is regarded as the serial's main tragic hero. Though he is innately a
good-hearted person,
 his tragic
flaws—ambition and greed—eventually leads to his downfall by the end of the
story.

Brother's Keeper is Chan's sixth collaboration with producer Wong. His breakout
performance in Wong's 2011 TVB legal drama The Other Truth
—his third collaboration with Wong—was what led Wong to cast
Chan as the lead actor for most of her newer works. Chan expressed that he has
high expectations for the serial and compares its time-lapsing scope to the
likes of critically successful dramas such as The Greed of Man
 and Vanity Fair.


    girlfriend.

Rachel is the second daughter of Lau Lai-kuen, who is the second wife of the
wealthy Philip Cheuk. Despite her parents' objections, Rachel insists to date
Sam. With Sam's help, Rachel eventually fulfills her dream of owning her own
fashion boutiques to sell her own brand designs. She was involved in love
triangle with Sam and Son for more than 20 years.

Wong had been wanting to work with Chung ever since she started production on
her 2012 comedy, No Good Either Way  in late 2011. Chung
was one of the first cast members of Brother's Keeper that was announced in
mid-2012. On her role, Chung said, "The role grew up overseas, so I naturally
get to speak English! I grew up in Canada as well... speaking English dialogue
is a very comfortable feeling for me."


    half-brother.

The younger son of Chow Yuk-mui, Shun is sole offspring of Mui's only marriage
with Lo Fu-shing. Due to his father's poor business, Shun spends most of his
time in the streets of Macau to handle his own peanut brittle vendor
 business. Resourceful, persistent, and confident, Shun's
small mobile food business eventually expands to a large multi-chained bakery
shop, the Pasterilia Lo Son Kei. The simple-minded Shun serves as a foil to
Sam's guileful character. Shun's story from rags to riches is also inspired by
the real-life story of Leong Chan-kuong, the owner of Macau's most famous bakery
shop, Koi Kei 

Moses Chan  was originally cast for the role of Shun, which was
announced simultaneously with Ruco Chan's casting in the late summer of 2012. In
August 2012, approximately a month before the serial was to commence shooting in
Hong Kong, Chan was reassigned to play opposite Wayne Lai  in TVB's
legal drama, Will Power .
 After Siu replaced
Chan, the character of Shun was rewritten to be younger.

    Chang-kai Ying (棖雞英; literally "Shrewish Ying"); Son's best friend.

Peevish, boyish, but loyal, Ying is one of Shun's closest childhood friends.
Ying falls in love with Shun and is a major supporter in Shun's quest to open up
his multi-chain business.

    Lung (龍少爺); Son and Ying's best friend.

Educated overseas, Lung hails from a wealthy family in Macau, and is the heir of
his family business, although he prefers to work as an insurance sales agent.
Despite his family business being one of the biggest rivals of Pasterilia Lo Son
Kei, Fei and Son are best friends. Fei has an obvious crush on Ying, but he is
supportive when Ying begins to date Son.

    Jukmui) — Sam and Shun's mother. Mui gave birth to her first-born, Kiu
   Tin-seng, in Hong Kong during the late 1960s. Kiu Sum, her son's policeman
   father, refuses to marry Mui after their son's birth, and in a blaze of
   anger, Mui destroys her son's Hong Kong birth certificate and moves back to
   her hometown in Foshan , China. There, she meets her husband, Lo
   Fu-shing, and gives birth to Shing's only son, Lo Wai-shun. In 1980, Mui and
   her family attempt to sneak across the Hong Kong borders to escape mainland
   China's tumultuous social unrest, but the family is separated by external
   forces. Mui, Shing, and Shun land in Macau, while Sam lands in Hong Kong.


RECURRING CAST

     leader who strikes an ambiguous friendship
   with Sam.
    Mui's only husband, whom she met in Foshan. Shing owns a struggling peanut
   brittle shop in Macau.
    the second wife of Philip Cheuk.
    sister.
     best friend.
    attracted to Sam and attempts to seduce him. Eyeing Fabio's wealth and power,
   Sam eventually gives in to her seduction.
    Sam's father, a Hong Kong police officer. Sum does not wish to acknowledge
   his relationship with Sam in public, which indirectly influenced Sam's
   decision to become a cop.
    known as Kim, Sum's second son and Sam's younger half-brother.
    Hounaam) — respectively Ying's father and Ying's younger brother.
    Angelina Lo as Yuen Shuk-ngo (阮淑娥; Jyun Sukngo) — Fei's parents.
    as K.O. Sir, Sam's mentor and Sum's biggest rival.
 

RECEPTION




CRITICAL RESPONSE

Brother's Keeper has received generally positive reviews from critics. On Douban
, the serial received a rating of 7.7 out of 10 based on over two
thousand votes. 


RATINGS

The following is a table that includes a list of the total ratings points based
on television viewership . "Viewers in millions" refers
to the number of people, derived from TVB Jade  ratings (including
TVB HD Jade), in Hong Kong who watched the episode live. The peak number of
viewers are in brackets.




ACCOLADES




TVB AWARDS PRESENTATION 2013




EXTERNAL LINKS


 * Official TVB website 