


Denotified Tribes  are the tribes in India
that were listed originally under the Criminal Tribes Act
 of 1871,  as
Criminal Tribes and "addicted to the systematic commission of non-bailable
offences." Once a tribe became "notified" as criminal, all its members were
required to register with the local magistrate, failing which they would be
charged with a crime under the Indian Penal Code .


This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout
guidelines . (August 2015)



The Criminal Tribes Act was repealed in 1949 and thus 'de-notified' the tribal
communities.  This Act, however, was
replaced by a series of Habitual Offenders Acts ,
that asked police to investigate a suspect's "criminal tendencies" and whether
their occupation is "conducive to settled way of life." The denotified tribes
were reclassified as "habitual offenders" in 1959.

The name "Criminal Tribes" is itself a misnomer as no definition of tribe
denotes occupation, but they were identified as tribes "performing" their
primary occupation. The first census was in 1871 and at that time there was no
consensus nor any definition of what constitutes a "tribe". The terms "tribe
" and "caste " were used interchangeably for these tribes.


CALL FOR REPEAL



The UN's anti-discrimination body Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination  (CERD)
asked India to repeal the Habitual Offenders Act (1952) and effectively
rehabilitate the denotified and nomadic tribes on 9 March 2007.



RESERVATIONS



In 2008, the National Commission for Denotified, Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes

(NCDNSNT) of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
 recommended equal reservations
, as available to Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes , for around 110 million people
belonging to the denotified tribes, nomadic  or
semi-nomadic tribes in India.  Along with
the tribes designated as, "Nomadic" or "Semi-Nomadic", the denotified tribes are
eligible for reservation. 



LIST OF DENOTIFIED TRIBES



Here are a list of tribes  and castes  which
were listed under Criminal Tribes Act  by British
 government in India .

             

SEE ALSO


    
  * Hijra (South Asia) 