

For other uses, see Rodewald (surname) .

Rodewald is an agricultural village in the district of Nienburg, Lower Saxony
 and is locally administrated by Steimbke .
At 14 km (8.7 mi) in length, Rodewald is considered the second longest village
in Lower Saxony, Germany and is split into three farming communities or
peasantries, known simply as; Lower, Middle and Upper Farming Community (obere,
mittlere and untere Bauerschaft).



It is situated approximately 40 km (25 mi) to the north of the federal state
capital, Hanover , 125 km (78 mi) south of Germany's second largest
city, Hamburg  and belonged until the administrative and territorial
reforms of 1974, to the district of Neustadt am Rübenberge
.


HISTORY



Rodewald is first mentioned in historical records during the initial quarter of
the 13th century, after which the Bishop of Minden requested that the Earl of
Wölpe establish a settlement. Through a systematic clearing of forests in the
northern area, which is identified today as Untere Bauernschaft, the village was
created and is ultimately where the name stems from; the direct English
translation clear + wood, i.e. from, Low German roode 'to root' and wald
'forest'. Each settler received an equal size of land in the Hagenhufendorf
 format, a typical form of High Middle Ages land ownership.

These pitches of land, no greater than the width of the farmstead, although
several hundred metres deep, were between 60 and 70 Morgen  in size (a
Morgen being approximately the amount of land tillable by one man behind an ox
in the morning hours of a day). This method of land ownership, typical of the
High Middle Ages, can still be observed as one passes along the Landesstrasse
 192 (Dorfstrasse in the north and Hauptstrasse in the south).

In the course of the centuries the village lengthened considerably with both
sides of the L192 becoming populated by the typical Fachhallenhäuser
 or timber framed farmhouses, found throughout the North
German Plain .

Only after the Second World War and with the luxury of the motor car becoming
available to the masses did the village begin to see buildings purely used as
housing, although in order to ensure a balance between landscape and
practicality two new areas in the more densely populated centre and an
industrial park at the southern edge were developed. Its original charm has been
retained with the open spaces along the street continuing to display the
Hagenhufendorf format.


THE FIRST AND SECOND WORLD WARS


reduction of the Ruhr
Pocket and advance to Elbe and Mulde rivers between 5 and 18 April 1945


FIRST WORLD WAR

During the course of the First World War Rodewald lost a number of its
inhabitants after they had been drafted to serve in the army or Deutsches
Reichsheer  as it was known at the time, although
the area was not occupied after the cessation of hostilities.


SECOND WORLD WAR

11TH ARMOURED DIVISION

During the dying days of the Second World War, the troops of the British 11th
Armoured Division  carried on their
steady, although strongly contested, advance across the North German Plain
. Under the command of Major General George Roberts
, it had 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division
 to its north (later being replaced by 7th
Armoured Division  after particularly
heavy fighting at Rethem ), and 6th Airborne Division
 to the south. Directly to its front
were the troops of SS Panzer Grenadier Ausbildungs und Bataillon 12. HJ, who had
been pushed back from Stolzenau during their defence of the Weser, and the
sailors of 2. Marine Infanterie Division
 that were now forming a defensive line
along the Aller. The Division formed an essential part of General Sir Bernard
Montgomery's  21st Army Group  during
its crossing of the Rhine  and the subsequent race to the
Baltic.

159TH INFANTRY BRIGADE

Having crossed the River Weser  at Petershagen, rather than the
intended crossing point at Stolzenau - which was staunchly being defended by SS
elements of the Hitler Youth and featured one of the last stands of the
Luftwaffe, the British 159th Infantry Brigade's
, forming the right hand flank of the
divisional thrust, advanced along its axis of Loccum, Rehburg, Eilvese, Hagen,
Dudensen, Laderholz and Rodewald. Its two battle groups were formed by combining
the 2nd Fife and Forfar Yeomanry  with 1st Battalion
the Herefordshire Regiment  and the 15th/19th The
King's Royal Hussars  with 1st Battalion
the Cheshire Regiment . Each battle group would then take
it in turns to head up the advance, where they would be leapfrogged by the other
battle group after any major actions, thus allowing the opportunity to establish
control and to re-organise should substantial losses be experienced.

With the objective of securing the bridge spanning the River Leine, the British
159th Infantry Brigade  fought
through nearby village of Laderholz where they met stiff resistance by soldiers
laid at the side of the roads and armed with Panzerfaust . On one
occasion a near miss occurred where a Panzerfaust struck, but did little more
than damage the vehicle's tool bin (the first three tanks not carrying infantry
for obvious reasons). It responded, however, by directing one of its 77 mm
 charges through the window in which the weapon was
fired, killing all the occupants of the room in the process.

divisional flash
of 11th Armoured Division

After quelling the last pockets of resistance in Laderholz, the 2nd Fife and
Forfar Yeomanry/1st Battalion the Herefordshire Regiment Battle Group, had the
unenviable task on 8 April 1945 of crossing the flat open country which
separates the southern tip of Rodewald from Laderholz. The German defenders
managed to set up concealed positions in the woods at Wiebusch, along with a
road block at the south-west entrance of the village and a brief barrage of
artillery and mortars were employed by the British in order to try and flush out
the panzerfaust-wielding infantrymen, before A Squadron of 2nd Fife and Forfar
Yeomanry could make their advance in their 35 tonne Comet  tanks
with infantry soldiers of 1st Battalion the Herefordshire Regiment perched
perilously on the exterior.

With resistance remaining steady in Wiebusch, a company of the 1st Battalion the
Herefordshire Regiment were to head north-east along the region of the River
Alpe , where they then turned east towards the centre of the
village. It soon became apparent that they would encounter no further resistance
as a white flag had been affixed to the church spire of St. Aegidien by Heinrich
Kahle and August Deecke, in order to prevent collateral damage occurring to an
area of very little strategic or military value.

In the meantime it was decided that C Squadron of 2nd Fife and Forfar Yeomanry
and C Company from the 1st Battalion the Herefordshire Regiment, should bypass
the delay at Wiebusch and make a cross-country dash from Laderholz to
Mandelsloh, in an attempt to secure a crossing of the River Leine
. On reaching Mandelsloh, it was found that the village was
undefended and that bridging a Helstorf was not possible. They then headed north
and just before nightfall, had a short sharp battle at Niedernstöcken where 70
prisoners were taken.

By the 9th of April the remaining elements of resistance had been extinguished,
or fled during the hours of darkness, and A Squadron of 2nd Fife and Forfar
Yeomanry moved west along Niedernstöckener Straße and into Niedernstocken itself
where they found the bridge already destroyed.

tanks  of 15th/19th The King's Royal Hussars
, 11th Armoured Division, crossing the
Weser at Petershagen, Germany, 7 April 1945.

With no viable crossing of the River Leine available to 159th Infantry Brigade,
its units were forced to head south, where they bridged using 6 Airborne
Division's  crossing at Neustadt am
Rbge, before taking up the advance through Esperke, Grindau, Schwarmstedt,
crossing the River Aller at Essel and pushing on towards Bergen-Belsen
. 

29TH ARMOURED BRIGADE

On the 9th of April, and less than 8 kilometres to the west, the infantry of the
4th Battalion the King's Shropshire Light Infantry
 and the 8th Battalion the Rifle Brigade
(Prince Consort's Own)  were given the
task of clearing Steimbke  of a Hitler Youth battalion which saw the
soldiers of SS-Panzer Grenadier Ausbildung und Ersatz Battalion 12
'Hitlerjugend' trying to retreat to the relative safety of the wood to the
north, which during their withdrawal, they were to endure a heavy mauling where
many were cut down by heavy tank fire of 23rd Hussars .

Due to their fanatical resistance, which left the village smouldering and cost
some 150 German casualties, it was decided that B Squadron and Recce Troop of
the 23rd Hussars, accompanied by F Company of 8th Battalion the Rifle Brigade
(Prince Consort's Own)], who were position just south of Steimbke should bypass
the capture of the village and advance eastwards along the Bundesstraße 214
, through Wendenborstel, Rodewald, Suderbruch, Norddrebber
and press on to the bridge at Bothmer in order to secure a crossing point for
29th Armoured Brigade , who were
forming the left hand thrust of 11 Armoured Division's advance through
Petershagen, Loccum, Rehrburg, Schneeren, Linsburg, Stöckse and Steimbke. On
their arrival at Nordrebber, the first vehicle was destroyed by Panzerfaust and
heavy fighting ensued with each house having to be systematically cleared. The
German troops were described as being 'fresh and full of spirit', as they tried
to delay the Allied advance on the river. Unfortunately this resulted in many of
the village's farmhouses being reduced to ashes. Having eventually cleared the
village, a prompt stab to the north-east proved futile as the bridge was blown
up in the advancing troops' faces (the bridge on the westbound exit of the B214
at Schwarmstedt  didn't exist at this point).


By the 10th of April, 159th Infantry Brigade had advanced north on the eastern
side of the Leine as far as Grindau, which allowed for the unhindered
construction of bridges at Helstorf, with 29th Armoured Brigade crossing here on
the 11th, before heading to Essel, via Bothmer and Schwarmstedt, which would
also be left in a pitiful state after much fighting. 

INNS OF COURT REGIMENT (THE DEVIL'S OWN)

Employed as the Division's reconnaissance  unit, the Inns of
Court Regiment  were used to liaise with 53rd (Welsh)
Infantry Division to the north, provide flank protection, sniff out potential
bridging points and areas of high interest, such as V2 components around
Nienburg area and an alleged PoW camp to the north of Steimbke. Having dispelled
these rumours, they then entered the north of Rodewald at Neudorf, having
arrived from Lichtenhorst, before pushing on without resistance to Gilten.

2. MARINE INFANTERIE DIVISION

remaining one man bunker standing
adjacent to a disused hunter's cabin in the woods around Paschenburg

The soldiers of 2. Marine Infanterie Division
, commanded by Vizeadmiral Schleuren,
had the unenviable title of being the last bastion of formal resistance by a
coherent German formation to fight against the British Army. Its ranks consisted
of Kriegsmarine , Volksgrenadier  and
Hitlerjugend , who although lacking in tactics and experience,
fought bravely and tenaciously, even though the War's outcome was already
obvious. With very few natural obstacles to assist in defence, the Division
would fall back to the region's three major rivers, where a major stand would be
made until the position became unsustainable and the defending troops would
withdraw during the hours of darkness in order to avoid being strafed by Allied
aircraft.

COLLATERAL DAMAGE, CIVILIAN CASUALTIES AND REFUGEES

Although Rodewald remained largely unscathed during both the ground advances and
the bombing raids of the Second World War, there are still splash marks to be
found on some of the south-westerly facing walls of the buildings around the
area of Krummende and shell holes are clearly visible in the woods at Wiebusch.
Whether any of the houses were destroyed during the fighting is unclear, but it
is fair to assume that the village was only defended at its entrance from
Laderholz.

Further information, war diaries and maps can be found by clicking here
.

AIRCRAFT LOSSES

During the Second World War, Rodewald was never a deliberate target of Bomber
Command , however, a number of losses were experienced by both
the Allied and Axis powers. On 10 February 1944, a Bf 109G-6
 piloted by Unteroffizier Alfred Arndt

of V.Jagdgeschwader 11 , crashed in the region of
Rodewald's Haidmühle. Although never officially identified and the grounds for
the aircraft's loss never established, he was laid to rest in Rodewald's
cemetery.

Then on 8 March 1944, Leutnant Wolfgang Kiesel

of I.Jagdgeschwader 11, died at the age of 24 when his Fw 190A-7 / R4 crashed in
unknown circumstances near Wendenborstel.

Another member of V.Jagdgeschwader 11 died on 4 April 1944, the unknown aircraft
being piloted by the 23-year-old Unteroffizier Paul Tröndle
,
forming a part of the Reichsverteidigung . The grounds
for his death are not clear and although he crashed in Rodewald, he was later
buried at Wunstorf's cemetery.

On 8 March 1944, an American B-17  named Sleepy
Time Gal
,
was flying a bombing mission from RAF Deopham Green ,
Norfolk to Berlin as part of the 452nd Bomb Group ,
731st Bombardment Squadron , when it was
intercepted over Hanover by ten to fifteen Fw 190s , Bf
109s  and Bf 110s . Initially
mistaking the distant aircraft for Allied escorts, the B-17 Flying Fortress was
soon peppered by cannon fire, resulting in the loss of two of the four engines.
Having ensured that his crew bailed out successfully, including the freeing of a
trapped gunner, and giving away his own parachute without hesitation, the pilot,
2nd Lieutenant Theodore H MacDonald, managed to crash land the aircraft in the
region of Lichtenmoor, with eight of the crew being taken as prisoners of war
and two later succumbing to their injuries.

The final loss in this area was again at Lichtenmoor when a Halifax VII
 bomber named Canada Kid

of 432 Squadron , Royal Canadian Air Force
, crashed on a bombing run from RAF East Moor
 to Hanover on 5 January 1945, 300 metres to the east of the
road which links Steimbke and Lichtenhorst. The aircraft had just turned on the
last leg of the course, south of Bremen, when a German night fighter attacked.
One of the wings caught fire and the flames spread rapidly. The 27-year-old
pilot, Flight Lieutenant JE Sales, was killed as a result, along with another
member of the crew. They were later buried at the Hanover War Cemetery and the
surviving five were held as prisoners of war.


COAT OF ARMS


Coat of Arms

The coat of arms consists of an owl perched on a clerestory window aperture,
surrounded by stone. The motive of the owl originates from a small stone owl
which can be found in the spire Rodewald's main church, St Aegidien.

It was approved in 1960 as a symbol of the Mittlere Bauernschaft parish by the
regional president of Hanover and in 1969 adopted to represent the village as a
whole.


TRANSPORTATION




ROAD

The village's 2,623 inhabitants are served by two major roads, these being the
Bundesstraße 214 , running east–west from Celle to Nienburg
and the Landesstraße 192 , which runs north–south from
Lichtenhorst to Neustadt am Rübenberge. Both are cyclist friendly and have
designated cycle paths encompassing a system where motor vehicles are obliged to
give way. The roads themselves are in relatively good condition, which is not
necessarily the case for many of the other surrounding villages whose roads have
been badly damaged by a number severe winters and remain in a poor condition due
to a lack of investment (often the only viable solution being an inconvenient
speed reduction from 50 to 30 km/h). To the east and south are two major
motorways, the Autobahn 7  and Autobahn 2 
respectively.


TRAIN AND BUS

Public transport is somewhat awkward should one intend to visit any of the local
cities or towns, except Nienburg  where a bus service
is in place. This is due to the bus service being restricted to within the
confines of the district of Nienburg, serving mainly school children, students
and adults without the luxury of a privately owned vehicle. The nearest train
station (and taxi service) is located 10 km to the east at the town of
Schwarmstedt , but due to it forming part of the district of
Soltau-Fallingbostel  cannot be reached by public
transport. Most of those who have access to a privately owned vehicle and intend
to travel into Hanover, but aim to avoid congestion, tend to drive the 25 km
south east to Bennemühlen , a town at the regional extremities of
Hanover where lower train fares can be obtained. Another option is to use the
Hanover bus service from Ladeholz or Niedernstöcken, which is again inconvenient
for those without access to a motor vehicle.


AIR

Hanover International Airport  is situated to
the north of the city in an area known as Langenhagen and is located besides the
Autobahn 352 . Consisting of three terminals and at an
approximate distance of 50 km by road, the airport is efficient not
overwhelming, yet offers a good selection of destinations.


SPORTS, LEISURE AND CULTURE




CLUBS

The village has an entwining sense of community spirit with most inhabitants
either actively or indirectly supporting one of the many clubs in operation. At
around 30 in strength, the main ones include:

SSV RODEWALD

The Sports and Games Club dating back to 1921 which aside fielding three
football teams at district level also offers the opportunity to participate at
handball, gymnastics, athletics, table tennis, Nordic walking and hiking. The
Club boasts a sports hall, training football pitch and club house, and a match
football pitch with a club house offering spectators food and drink.

SCHÜTZENVEREIN

Literally meaning Marksmen Club, there are three Schützenvereinen
 within the village, one per Bauernschaft, with the members
wearing a very distinctive and traditional uniform linking back to their days as
a local militia. Those participating apply marksmanship principles, without
attaching any military importance and compete in a purely sporting manner. The
Clubs have their own Schützenhaus and hold an annual internal competition with
the winner of the men's, women's and children's events being crowned during a
large celebration known as Schützenfest . The weapons used tend
to range from air-rifles to small bore weapons and crossbows.

THEATERVEREIN PRECIOSA

An amateur dramatics club provides entertainment in the form of short plays and
pantomimes, often performing at Gasthaus Ernst Höper on Krummende. One of their
specialities is the use of Plattdeutsch  during some
presentations in an attempt to revive a local language which has been in decline
since the 18th century.

REIT UND FAHRVEREIN

Also founded in 1921, the Riding and Carriage Club thrived until the Second
World War when all but the most essential horses were commandeered for the war
effort. Post war the Club again began to flourish and exists to this day. The
riding hall is used for various activities including lessons in dressage, show
jumping and horseback gymnastics.

FREIWILLIGE FEUERWEHR

Fire Station

Although more a form of public service than a club, Rodewald has a volunteer
fire brigade consisting of three active groups (one per Bauernshaft), a senior
members association and a youth organisation. All active members must have
attended a form of basic training and continue to develop their skills during
scheduled monthly meetings where continuance training is delivered or equipment
and hydrants are tested and maintained. Regional courses are also available in
group leadership, the use of breathing apparatus, vehicle maintenance and radio
operation.

During an emergency the alarm is raised by the use of numerous civil defence
sirens signalling that all active members within the vicinity are to make their
way to the centrally located fire station and man the two fire engines and
minibus where needed. As all local villages are interlinked and retain their own
volunteer fire brigade, a sizable response can therefore be guaranteed when the
situation requires it.

In the near future it is envisaged that a larger fire engine will replace one of
the existing vehicles, which will also involve much structural adaptation to the
station itself.


FOOD AND DRINK

EATING OUT

Specialising in Greek and Italian dishes, Pegasus on Neudorf offers the relaxing
atmosphere of a well kept restaurant with a sizable and varied menu. Another
local family business is the Big Bull take-away which is situated by the main
crossroad in the centre of the village. In true German fashion it has a beer
garden and is highly regarded for its Currywurst and chips.

BARS AND PUBS

Although different from the British pub culture, there are many bars and pubs
(Kneipen und Gaststätten) which may be frequented in the same fashion in which
one would a British public house. The Deutsches Haus on Hauptstraße is often the
venue of live music and regularly holds Irish nights. Gasthaus Ernst Höper on
Krummende is host to theatrical performances by the local amateur dramatics
group and Pegasus features a sports bar in the annex. There are also numerous
function rooms available for private functions and meetings.

DISCOTHEQUES AND NIGHTLIFE

Blaue Maus Diskothek in full swing.

The Diskothek Blaue Maus (Blue Mouse Disco), situated on Hauptstraße, is well
known throughout the region and holds the unique, but unofficial title as a
farmer's disco. Theme nights are common and a combination of live and
disc-jockeyed music can often be heard, as well as other forms of entertainment.
The biannual Hektar Party, which takes place in spring and autumn, is usually a
resounding success with local farmers donning shirts emblazoned with such
details as farm type, size, siblings and tractors owned, whilst circling around
ice filled buckets of Bacardi and Coke. To add volume to the venue, a large tent
is often erected to form a dance hall for the live music acts and the immediate
area is surrounded by fast food stalls.


RECREATION

FREIBAD

open-air naturally filtered pool in high
summer.

The centrally located outdoor swimming pool is open during the weekends of
summer months. It is considered eco-friendly due to the utilisation of aquatic
plants and haydite, a rock to which friendly bacteria attach, acting as
biological cleansers. Its own waterfall, aside providing a base for those who
wish to jump into the water from a height, oxygenates the pool and acts as a
return. A kiosk offers all the delights of a typical German snack bar or
Schnellimbis and there are also ample other features available such as; water
slides, pontoons, dedicated sun bathing area, ball games and changing
facilities.


FESTIVALS

Throughout the year there a plethora of festivals which take place of varying
scales and themes. The most notable being:

OSTERFEUER

The Osterfeuer, or Easter Fire, is celebrated on the Holy Saturday in the 'obere
Bauernschaft' and on Easter Sunday at the Fire Station, during the hours of
nightfall. Orchestrated by the local fire brigade, a large collection of small
branches and twigs are heaped up on the grassed area close to the station. This
allows the local inhabitants to rid their gardens of the year's tree and hedge
cuttings.

It is a family event with food and drink being available, as well as a time for
the local children to meet up and play.

SCHÜTZENFEST IN WIEBUSCH

typical example of the street decorations
during Schutzenfest.

Schützenfest is normally a weekend affair which takes place during the weekend
following Pfingsten or Pentecost as it is known in English. A marching band
usually parades along the main road where they halt at each individual winner's
house where various festivities steeped in tradition take place (see above for
details). The event's crescendo later takes place in Wiebusch where traditional
music is played, along with food and drink being served.

JAHRMARKT IN MARKTPLATZ

Translating as yearly market, Jahrmarkt is one of Rodewald's biggest events.
Developing as a village fair where livestock and foodstuffs such as honey,
saffron and pepper could be traded, it later became a place where people would
ride carousels, enjoy multi-national fast food, play fairground games for
prizes, listen to live music, dance and frequent many of the temporary bars
which form part of the circuit. Taking place during the third weekend of
September, the gathering still retains its nickname of Heiratsmarkt or marriage
market due to the amount of local folk who met there and later set up in holy
matrimony.

ERNTEFEST IN WIEBUSCH

Erntefest procession.

Traditionally a time for local farmers to celebrate the Ernte or harvest, this
three-day event is staged during the first weekend of September and involves a
large tent being set up in the wooded area of Wiebusch to the south of the
village. Organised by the Schützenverein, a procession consisting of various
floats, tractors and trailers decorated in harvested crops, a marching band in
yearly alternating fancy dress outfits and members of the Schützenverien itself,
march on Saturday afternoon from Marktplaz, at the centre of the village, to
Wiebusch, where they are readily replenished with liquid refreshments by
spectators along the route. Local food and drink can be enjoyed whilst listening
to live music, where many villagers practice the Disco-Fox  style
of dancing.


LOCAL WILDLIFE


herd of roe deer seen grazing on agricultural land

The surrounding area is awash with local wildlife which tends to live within the
three main types of habitat available; agricultural fields, wooded areas of
mixed deciduous and coniferous content, and moorland.

In the open areas can be seen many birds of prey such as the common buzzard,
kestrel, sparrow hawk and during warmer months, the red kite. Mammals which are
easy to spot include; wild boar, red fox, feral cat, hare, roe deer and the
slightly larger fallow deer, which tend to be more suited to the marshier areas
to the north.

Along Rodewald's stream, known as the Alpe, water birds can be commonly seen in
and around the flooded fields such as the stork, heron, great egret and
kingfisher.

Hunting is common within the area with numerous elevated hides of a fixed nature
being scattered around tree lines. Aside providing game meat, it also helps
control the deer and wild boar populations which destroy crops, resulting in
farmers viewing them as pests.

During the fawning period of 1 April and 15 July, dogs are not allowed off their
leash in open countryside with the animal liable to be shot if seen harassing
game or livestock.

Deer and wild boar prove a real risk to motorists with collisions taking place
regularly. In an effort to remind motorist of the danger, pink crosses are
placed on the spot of any recent accidents.


THE STRANGLER OF LICHTENMOOR

this spot on 27 August 1948, The
Strangler of Lichtenmoor, a powerfully built male wolf, was shot by farmer
Hermann Gaatz of Eilte

The last wolf in the area was destroyed by a 61 years of age farmer named
Hermann Gaatz on 27 August 1948 around the Schotenheide area between Eilte and
Rodewald. It followed what had become a period of local hysteria known as Würger
vom Lichtenmoor , or the
Strangler of Lichtenmoor, after a number of domestic pets, cattle, sheep and
wildlife had been found mutilated injuries tended to be unusually clean cuts and
around the hind right quarters, which suggested a human with a knife rather than
those inflicted by a predatory animal). A stone was positioned on the very spot
where the animal fell, which had been found to be a 6-year-old male weighing
43 kg, with a shoulder height of 85 cm and length of 1.70 cm, who last seen
stalking deer.

The claim to fame of shooting the last wolf in the area proved short lived as in
1955 a conservationist called William Scharff shot what was in fact to be the
very last one. Although no others have been seen to date, it has been suggested
that the wolves are slowly returning from the east and Poland.