

 Admiral Thomas Boulton Fargo AO  (born June 13, 1948)  served in the United States Navy  during the late 20th century and early 21st century. He served as Commander, United States Pacific Command , at Camp H. M. Smith , Hawaii  from May 2, 2002 to February 26, 2005. He was the twentieth officer to hold the position.



 BIOGRAPHY


 Born in San Diego, California , in June 1948, Fargo attended high school in Coronado, California , and Sasebo, Japan , and graduated from the United States Naval Academy  in June 1970.
 His father, Thomas A. Boulton, was a naval officer who was killed in a plane crash in 1957. His mother, Helen, remarried in 1960 to Captain William Fargo, US Navy. Helen was a Lieutenant in the US Navy Nurse Corps during World War II; both Thomas and William graduated from the Naval Academy (Class of 1943 and Class of 1939, respectively.) 
 Trained in joint, naval and submarine  commands, Fargo served in a variety of sea and shore duty assignments. At sea, his five assignments in both attack  and ballistic missile submarines  included Executive Officer  aboard Plunger  and Commanding Officer  of Salt Lake City . While commander of the Salt Lake City, Fargo hosted aboard several members of the cast of the movie The Hunt for Red October  as they were researching their roles as submarine crew members. He served as Commander, Submarine Group SEVEN, Commander Task Force SEVEN FOUR, and Commander Task Force ONE FIVE SEVEN in the Western Pacific, Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf  from 1992 to 1993. He commanded the United States FIFTH Fleet  and Naval Forces of the Central Command during two years of Iraqi contingency operations from July 1996 to July 1998. Fargo served as the 29th Commander in Chief, U.S. Pacific Fleet  from October 1999 to May 2002.
 Ashore, Fargo served in the Bureau of Naval Personnel  and with the Commander in Chief, U.S. Atlantic Fleet  and has had multiple assignments in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. After his selection to Flag rank  in 1994, Admiral Fargo has served as Director of Operations (J-3), U.S. Atlantic Command during the Haiti  intervention; as Director, Assessment Division (N-81) for the Chief of Naval Operations; and the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Plans, Policy and Operations (N3/N5).
 While serving as Commander of the U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM), Fargo informed the United States Congress  of his plans to retire from the Navy. Although an Air Force  flag officer was nominated to succeed him, the Senate  declined to confirm the nominee, as it was customary to fill that post with a Navy flag officer. President Bush  accordingly extended Fargo's mandatory retirement  date. Fargo ultimately retired from military service in 2005, when the Senate confirmed Admiral William J. Fallon  to succeed him as Commander of USPACOM.[citation needed ]
 Admiral Fargo is a 1989 recipient of the Vice Admiral James Bond Stockdale Award for Inspirational Leadership . His personal decorations include the Distinguished Service Medal  (four awards), the Defense Superior Service Medal , and the Legion of Merit  (three awards). In February 2005 he was appointed an honorary Officer of the Order of Australia  "for distinguished naval service, particularly for strengthening the Australia-United States alliance whilst Commander United States Pacific Command".

 In 2010, the National Bureau of Asian Research  appointed Fargo as the second holder of the Shalikashvili Chair  in National Security Studies.

 In 2019, Fargo became the 22nd chairman of USAA .


 AWARDS AND DECORATIONS


 United States Pacific Command  Badge
 Gold star Gold star Gold star Navy Distinguished Service Medal  with 3 gold award stars  Defense Superior Service Medal  Gold star Gold star Legion of Merit  with 2 award stars Gold star Gold star Meritorious Service Medal  with 2 award stars Navy Commendation Medal  Gold star Navy Achievement Medal  with award star Joint Meritorious Unit Award  Navy Unit Commendation  Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation  Navy "E" Ribbon  Navy Expeditionary Medal  Bronze star Bronze star National Defense Service Medal  with 2 bronze service stars  Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal  Bronze star Vietnam Service Medal  with service star Bronze star Bronze star Navy Sea Service Deployment Ribbon  with two service stars Navy & Marine Corps Overseas Service Ribbon  Honorary Officer of the Order of Australia  (Military Division)

 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER


 Admiral Fargo served as the inspiration for the character of Commander Bart Mancuso in the film The Hunt for Red October . Scott Glenn  spent several days preparing for his role aboard the Salt Lake City . It was during this time that he decided to base his portrayal of his character on then-Commander Fargo.

 Fargo had told Glenn, "I've given orders to all the men on board to treat you as equal rank with me so every time for the next few days while we are out, when someone comes up and reports to me, they are going to turn around and report to you, and I'm going to tell you what we are going to do about it. There may be once or twice that I'm going to ask you to go to your quarters when we are dealing with stuff that is top secret."

 "Tom Fargo was a strong, tough commander, but he had a degree of relaxation and looseness that I never would have expected." – Scott Glenn.

 "He was incredibly confident...he was this guy you would follow into hell." – Alec Baldwin . 