


Cindy Chao (Chinese : 趙心綺) is a Taiwanese
jewellery designer. She founded her company, Cindy Chao The Art Jewel, in 2004.
She is known for her Black Label Masterpiece Collection and Annual Butterfly.






EARLY LIFE



Chao was born in Taiwan  in the 1970s. She is the daughter of a
sculptor and a businesswoman. Her grandfather Hsieh Tzu-Nan (simplified Chinese
: 谢自南; traditional Chinese
: 謝自南; pinyin : Xiè Zìnán) was an
architect who designed temples across Taiwan. 
 According to Chao, it was her grandfather who
inspired her interest in architecture.


CAREER



Chao learned various techniques and skills of sculpting from her father, which
eventually shaped her own style of design.  In
2004, Chao established Cindy Chao The Art Jewel and opened its first showroom in
Taipei.  In 2007, she became the first Taiwanese
jewellery artist to take part in a Christie's  New York fine
jewellery auction.] Her pieces
feature classic 18th century artisan techniques of crafting designs in wax known
as la cire perdue (Lost-wax casting ). Chaos's pieces are
completed using precious metal and gemstones.

Chao's two collections, Black Label Masterpieces and White Label Collection,
have been exhibited at art fairs and institutions around the world including
Beijing Today Art Museum, Tokyo Mori Art Museum, 
Biennale des Antiquaires in Paris,  Masterpiece
London,  
  and TEFAF
Maastricht.   In
2010, Cindy Chao become one of the first Taiwanese jewellery artists to have one
of her designs, an Annual Butterfly, inducted into the Smithsonian National
Museum of Natural History. 
 
 

In 2020, her first annual butterfly brooch the 2008 Black Label Masterpiece I,
Ruby Butterfly Brooch, was donated to the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris
, displayed in its Galerie des Bijoux.





In 2021, her 2018 Black Label Masterpiece XVIII “Peony Brooch” was inducted into
the William and Judith Bollinger Gallery of the Victoria and Albert Museum
.





On 17 November 2021, Cindy Chao was appointed Chevalier dans l’Ordre des Arts et
Lettres (Order of the Arts and the Letters) by France's minister of culture
Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin during a ceremony held in Paris, France.
 



JEWELLERY




BLACK LABEL MASTERPIECES

The Black Label Masterpieces are inspired by Chao's passion for architecture,
sculpture, travel, and nature. The limited-edition jewels are created annually,
and each piece is named, numbered, and dated. 

The 2018 Black Label Masterpiece XVIII “Peony Brooch” by Cindy Chao The Art
Jewel was inducted into the William and Judith Bollinger Gallery of the Victoria
and Albert Museum .



 Cindy Chao was commissioned to
transform a ruby necklace and chose to create a peony, an imperial flower, which
in Chinese tradition would bring good fortune. The gestation of the brooch took
place over eleven years. 
The Peony Brooch is made in titanium 
 and set with 105 oval-cut
rubies and dusted with a further 2,380 rubies and 668 diamonds.



ANNUAL BUTTERFLIES

Every year Chao creates one butterfly piece.  The
first butterfly was created in 2008 and has since been coined as the Annual
Butterflies. Each butterfly takes more than 18 months to complete as gemstones
and thousands of pavé-set diamonds are set on and around delicately molded
wings.]

The 2009 Black Label Masterpiece I, Royal Butterfly Brooch, was donated to the
Smithsonian Institution National Museum of Natural History's
 gem collection.
  The Royal Butterfly
is composed of 2,328 gems, totaling 77 carats .
 The centerpieces of the butterfly's wings contain
four large faceted diamond slices stacked atop a pave layer of faceted diamonds,
creating a pattern resembling a living butterfly's wings.

The 2014 Black Label Masterpiece I, Ballerina Butterfly, was designed in
collaboration with Sarah Jessica Parker .


The 2008 Black Label Masterpiece I, Ruby Butterfly Brooch, was donated to the
Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris , displayed
in its Galerie des Bijoux. 


 It is the first butterfly brooch
created by Cindy Chao and it is made of 18K gold, encrusted with two Burmese
rubies totaling almost 13 carats  and are surrounded by more
than 1,000 diamonds. There are 82 sapphires in the other side totaling almost 2
carats . 