


The Reapers' War (Catalan : Guerra dels Segadors, Eastern
Calatan:  ; Spanish
: Guerra de los Segadores), also known as the Catalan
Revolt, was a conflict that affected the Principality of Catalonia
 between the years of 1640 and 1659. It had an
enduring effect in the Treaty of the Pyrenees  (1659),
which ceded the County of Roussillon  and the northern
half of the County of Cerdanya  to France  (see
French Cerdagne ), splitting these northern Catalan
territories off from the Principality of Catalonia 
and the Crown of Aragon , and thereby receding the borders of
Spain  to the Pyrenees .




BACKGROUND


This section needs additional citations for verification
. (August 2022)

de Sang (7 June 1640)

The war had its roots in the discomfort generated in Catalan society by the
presence of the royal army (made mostly of mercenaries from different
nationalities) during the Franco-Spanish War 
between the Kingdom of France and the Monarchy of Spain as part of the Thirty
Years' War , as well the opposition of Catalan institutions
to the centralised policies of the Royal Court.

Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares
, the chief minister of Philip IV
, had been trying to distribute more evenly the huge
economic and military burden of the Spanish Empire . But his
Union of Arms  (Spanish: Union de Armas) policy raised
hostilities and protests all across the states of the Monarchy of Spain.
Resistance in Catalonia was especially strong; the Catalan Courts
 of 1626 and 1632 were never concluded, due to the opposition
of the states against the economic and military measures of Olivares, many of
which violated the Catalan constitutions .

In 1638, the canon  of La Seu d'Urgell  Pau
Claris , known for his opposition to non-Catalan bishops who
collaborated with the Crown, was elected by the ecclesiastic estate as president
of the Generalitat , with Francesc
de Tamarit  elected member of the Generalitat by the
military estate and Josep-Miquel Quintana Torroella by the popular estate.
Around 1639, both causes approached and the identification and solidarity of the
peasants took place with the attitude of political distrust of the authorities.
Thus the political doctrine of the uprising and the popular ideology of the
revolt were formed.

Claris , President of the Generalitat during the first steps of
the War

Catalan peasants, who were forced to quarter the royal army and reported events
such as religious sacrileges,  destruction of
personal properties and rape of women by the soldiers, responded in a series of
local rebellions against their presence.

The revolt grew, until the Corpus Christi day  of May
1640 in Barcelona, with an uprising known as 'Bloody Corpus' (Catalan: Corpus de
Sang ), under the slogans "Long live the faith of Christ!",
"The King our Lord has declared war on us!" 
"Long live the land, death to bad government", "Reap our chains". When the
bishop of Barcelona, after blessing the furious crowd, asked them: "Who is your
captain? What is your flag?" They raised a big Christ on the Cross statue
covered with an all black cloth and shouted "Here is our captain, this is our
flag!". This 'Bloody Corpus' which began with the death of a reaper (Catalan:
segador), ] and led to the
assassination by Catalan rebels  of the Spanish
Viceroy of Catalonia , the second Count of Santa Coloma
, 
marked the beginning of the conflict. The irregular militia involved were known
as "Miquelets ". The situation took Olivares by surprise,
with most of the Spanish army fighting on other fronts far from Catalonia. The
Council of Aragon  demanded more military presence in
Barcelona as the only way to restore the order.


CONFLICT



Pau Claris , President
 of the Generalitat of
Catalonia , called the politician members of the all
Principality in order to form a Junta de Braços  or Braços
Generals (States-General), a consultive body. The calling was a success, and the
presence of royal cities and feudal villages was exceptionally large. This
assembly, which worked with individual voting, began to create and apply various
revolutionary measures, such as the establishment of a Council of Defense of the
Principality and a special tax for the nobility (the Batalló),
 while the tension with the monarchy grew.

At the same time, the Generalitat maintained contacts with France, in order to
establish an alliance between the Principality of Catalonia and this country. By
the pact of Ceret, French promised to help the Principality. In this way, the
States-General presided by Pau Claris proclaimed the Catalan Republic
 under the protection of the French monarchy, on 17
January 1641, which lasted a week until 21 January 1641, when they declared the
French king Louis XIII  count of Barcelona
. 


of the secession of Catalonia and its
integration in to France

The threat of the French enemy establishing a powerful base south of the
Pyrenees caused an immediate reaction from the Habsburg monarchy. The Habsburg
government sent a large army of 26,000 men under Pedro Fajardo 
to crush the Catalan Revolt. On its way to Barcelona, the Spanish army retook
several cities, executing hundreds of prisoners, and a rebel army of the Catalan
Republic was defeated in Martorell , near Barcelona, on 23 January.
In response the Catalans reinforced their efforts and the Franco-Catalan armies
obtained an important military victory over the Spanish army in the Battle of
Montjuïc  (26 January 1641).

Despite this success, the peasant uprising was becoming uncontrollable in some
places, progressively focusing on the Catalan nobility and Generalitat itself.
In effect, the conflict was also a class war, with the peasants revolting both
against the Habsburg monarchy and against their own ruling classes, which turned
to France for support.  For the next decade the
Catalans fought under French vassalage, taking the initiative after Montjuïc.
Meanwhile, increasing French control of political and administrative affairs
(maritime ports, taxes, key bureaucratic positions, etc.) and a firm military
focus on the neighbouring Spanish kingdoms of Valencia 
and Aragon , in line with Richelieu
's war against Spain, gradually undermined Catalan
enthusiasm for the French.

A Franco-Catalan army under Philippe de La Mothe-Houdancourt
 moved south and gained several victories
against the Spanish, but the sieges of Tarragona (1644), Lleida
 and Tortosa  finally failed and the allies
had to withdraw.

In the north of Catalonia in Roussillon, they were more successful. Perpignan
was taken from the Spanish after a siege of 10 months
, and the whole of Roussillon  was
under French control. Shortly after, Spanish relief armies were defeated at the
Battle of Montmeló  and Battle of Barcelona
.

In 1652, a Spanish offensive captured Barcelona 
bringing the Catalan capital under Spanish control again. Irregular resistance
continued for several years afterwards and some fighting took place north of the
Pyrenees but the mountains would remain from then on the effective border
between Spanish and French territories.

The war was concurrent with the Arauco War  in Chile
 where the Spanish fought a coalition of native Mapuches
. With the Arauco War being a lengthy and costly 
conflict, the Spanish crown ordered its authorities in Chile to sign a peace
agreement  with the Mapuche in order to
concentrate the empire's resources in fighting the Catalans. This way the
Mapuche obtained a peace treaty and a recognition on behalf of the crown in a
case unique for any indigenous group in the Americas.



RESOLUTION


of Catalonia with the resulting division

The conflict extended beyond the Peace of Westphalia ,
which concluded the Thirty Years' War  in 1648 but remained
part of the Franco-Spanish War (1635–1659) 
with the confrontation between two sovereigns and two Generalitats, one based in
Barcelona, under the control of Spain and the other in Perpinyà (Perpignan
), under the occupation of France. In 1652 the French authorities
renounced Catalonia, but held control of Roussillon, thereby leading to the
signing of the Treaty of the Pyrenees  in 1659.


Spanish troops being busy in Catalonia considerably helped Portugal
, on the other side of the Iberian Peninsula, in successfully
shaking off Spanish rule and winning its Restoration War
 at the same time.[citation needed
]


SEE ALSO


    of Catalonia. The current lyrics are from 1899, originally based in this
   revolt.
    supported by Spain
    from 1687–1689.
    in Slovakia  from 1848 to 1849.
 * Joan Pere Fontanella , Catalan judge and advocate