

 Østermarkskolen (English: East-field-school) is one of two city schools located in Aars  city, Denmark, the other one being Aars school. There are also a third school, Vestermarkskolen which teaches students with autism , Down syndrome  and multi-disabled. The school is split up in wings which is called Fløje in Danish, in Fløj I has kindergarten class to 2nd grade, Fløj II has 4th grade to 5th grade, Fløj III has 6th grade to 8th grade, Fløj IV has 3rd grade and 9th grade is placed in Fløj VI.


 There are 45 teachers  employed, 3 kindergarten class leaders, 15 educators, 1 school principal , 1 deputy school principal, 1 SFO  leader, 1 SFO deputy head, 2 secretaries, 1 service manager, 1 service employee (part timer), 1 person in 50-50 job order, 5 people in flexjob, 6 cleaning assistants.


 OUTDOOR


 The school have basketball  court, and some soccer  fields and in 2016/2017 the school got a disk golf  course. The school followed the example of Aalborg , Aarhus  and Randers  since those cities already had a disk golf course. The idea to bring a disk golf course to Østermarkskolen was proposed by two teachers: Lars Kjølby Lund, a mathematics  and sports teacher, and Christian Bunk Svane, a sports and geography  teacher. The courses are between 50 and 150 meters  long and there is six holes/lanes. It can be freely used by all, after school time. 

 SEE ALSO

  * List of schools in Denmark 
 In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname  is Unzué and the second or maternal family name is Urdániz.
 Marta Unzué Urdániz (born 4 July 1988) is a Spanish footballer  who plays as a defensive midfielder  and occasionally as a right back  for Primera División  club Athletic Bilbao .


 She spent over a decade with Barcelona, winning several trophies and featuring in the UEFA Women's Champions League .  

 CLUB CAREER


 Unzué arrived at Barcelona in 2006 from CA Osasuna , along with her twin sister Elba.   The team performed poorly and were relegated  in her first season. Elba left the club after four years, but Marta remained and was appointed captain after the departure of Vicky Losada  in 2015.  She maintained her role of first captain for two years.
 On 24 July 2018, a deal was agreed for 30-year-old Unzué to join Athletic Bilbao  on a two-year loan contract.

 At the end of her loan contract, in April 2020, she announced her departure from FC Barcelona  after 14 years with the club to permanently transfer to Athletic Bilbao .  She left having recorded the second-most appearances of all time for Barcelona with 360. 

 EDUCATION


 Unzué has obtained a degree in physical activity and sport science in 2010, and a master's degree in nutrition and food in 2014 from the University of Barcelona . She also has a Level 2 certificate in football coaching . 


 PERSONAL LIFE


 Unzue's uncle is Movistar Team  general manager, Eusebio Unzué . Her other uncle, Juan Carlos Unzué  played football for CA Osasuna , FC Barcelona  and Sevilla FC  as a goalkeeper . 


 HONOURS

 FC Barcelona     , 2012–13    , 2013–14    , 2014–15          ,     2013 , 2014    , 2017    , 2018      2012, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017

 Brother's Keeper (Chinese : 巨輪; lit. 'big wheel') is a Hong Kong television  drama serial produced by Amy Wong  and TVB . It stars Ruco Chan , Linda Chung , Edwin Siu  and Kristal Tin  as the main cast of the series. It premiered on 23 September 2013 on TVB Jade  in Hong Kong. The final two episodes aired back-to-back on Saturday, 2 November 2013. The plot is based on the story of Koi Kei Bakery , which is also the show's main sponsor.





 The serial, set between the years 1980 and 2013, depicts the moral life struggles of two half-brothers Kiu Tin-seng (Ruco Chan ) and Lo Wai-son (Edwin Siu ) during the late and post-colonial periods of Hong Kong  and Macau . Historical events that were set against this era, including Hong Kong's 1980 Touch Base Policy , Macau's relaxed immigration laws of 1982, the 1991 goldsmith robberies , the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong  and Macau  to China in the late 1990s, the 1998 Hong Kong financial crisis , the 1999 Macanese triad  wars, the 2003 Hong Kong SARS outbreak , and the 2008 Hong Kong financial recession, serves as some of the key plot vehicles that drive the changing fates of the brothers and their families.

 Development for Brother's Keeper began in mid-2012. A teaser trailer was unveiled at TVB's 2013 Sales Presentation event, which was held on 8 November 2012. The trailer premiered on TVB Jade on 24 November 2012.  The serial was also exhibited as one of eighteen TVB grand television drama productions at the 17th Hong Kong International Film & TV Market in March 2013.
 The sequel, Brother's Keeper II , was released in 2016.

 PRODUCTION



 FILMING
 A costume fitting press conference was held on 19 September 2012, and principal photography  began in Hong Kong in late September 2012. A camera commencement blessing ceremony was held on 17 October 2012.
 Production relocated to Macau on 21 November 2012.  On 19 December 2012, the crew resumed shooting in Hong Kong. The final scenes of the drama were completed on 1 February 2013. Macau's Koi Kei Bakery is a major sponsor for the serial.


 PLOT


 Brother's Keeper is a story about two brothers of the same mother but different fathers, "Sam" Kiu Tin-seng (Ruco Chan) and Lo Wai-son (Edwin Siu). Sam was born in Hong Kong, the son of Chow Yuk-mui (Louise Lee) and Kiu Sum (Lee Kwok Lun). Due to Kiu Sum refusing to marry Chow Yuk-mui, Yuk-mui decided to take Sam to Foshan, China to start anew. In Foshan, Yuk-mui got married with Lo Fu-shing (Lau Kong) and gave birth to Son a few years afterwards.
 Not long after, the family of four decided to cross the border to start a new life in Hong Kong. The family of four eventually got separated with Sam ending up in Hong Kong, while Yuk-mui, Fu-shing, and Son ending up in Macau.
 The two brothers lived very different lives in the course of the next 20 years. The very hardworking and ambitious Sam managed to graduate from college and became a police officer like his biological father, Kiu Sum. He has a girlfriend named Rachel Cheuk (Linda Chung) whom he is willing to do anything to fulfill her dreams of opening a fashion store. In order to achieve his goal, he seduces Fabio (Ankie Beilke) and uses her in the process. In addition, Sam also has an ambiguous relationship with a triad member named Keung Yung (Louis Cheung) who later caused Sam to end up in jail.
 Son, who is very simple-minded, only wants to live a peaceful and comfortable life in Macau. He is good friends with Yiu Man-ying (Krystal Tin) and Lung Fei (Louis Yuen). In order to avoid his abusive father (Fu-shing), Son works with his mother (Yuk-mui) at a restaurant. The lives of the two brothers, Sam and Son began to change after they meet up again. The two brothers in the series will go from 20 to 50 years old. This also shows the phrase "rags to riches" as Son becomes a rich businessowner from a poor young boy.

 CAST AND CHARACTERS



 MAIN CAST
     Sam.
 Independent, clever, and talented, Sam is a distinguished police officer for the Royal Hong Kong Police Force , taking him only five years to get promoted from the sergeant rank to the chief inspector rank. Sam is Chow Yuk-mui's eldest son, sired by Kiu Sum, who is also a Hong Kong police officer. Rejected by his biological father, Sam suffers through a tremendously difficult childhood and is emancipated by his parents at an early age. Sam is regarded as the serial's main tragic hero. Though he is innately a good-hearted person,  his tragic flaws—ambition and greed—eventually leads to his downfall by the end of the story.
 Brother's Keeper is Chan's sixth collaboration with producer Wong. His breakout performance in Wong's 2011 TVB legal drama The Other Truth —his third collaboration with Wong—was what led Wong to cast Chan as the lead actor for most of her newer works. Chan expressed that he has high expectations for the serial and compares its time-lapsing scope to the likes of critically successful dramas such as The Greed of Man  and Vanity Fair.

     girlfriend.
 Rachel is the second daughter of Lau Lai-kuen, who is the second wife of the wealthy Philip Cheuk. Despite her parents' objections, Rachel insists to date Sam. With Sam's help, Rachel eventually fulfills her dream of owning her own fashion boutiques to sell her own brand designs. She was involved in love triangle with Sam and Son for more than 20 years.
 Wong had been wanting to work with Chung ever since she started production on her 2012 comedy, No Good Either Way  in late 2011. Chung was one of the first cast members of Brother's Keeper that was announced in mid-2012. On her role, Chung said, "The role grew up overseas, so I naturally get to speak English! I grew up in Canada as well... speaking English dialogue is a very comfortable feeling for me."

     half-brother.
 The younger son of Chow Yuk-mui, Shun is sole offspring of Mui's only marriage with Lo Fu-shing. Due to his father's poor business, Shun spends most of his time in the streets of Macau to handle his own peanut brittle vendor  business. Resourceful, persistent, and confident, Shun's small mobile food business eventually expands to a large multi-chained bakery shop, the Pasterilia Lo Son Kei. The simple-minded Shun serves as a foil to Sam's guileful character. Shun's story from rags to riches is also inspired by the real-life story of Leong Chan-kuong, the owner of Macau's most famous bakery shop, Koi Kei 
 Moses Chan  was originally cast for the role of Shun, which was announced simultaneously with Ruco Chan's casting in the late summer of 2012. In August 2012, approximately a month before the serial was to commence shooting in Hong Kong, Chan was reassigned to play opposite Wayne Lai  in TVB's legal drama, Will Power .  After Siu replaced Chan, the character of Shun was rewritten to be younger.
     Chang-kai Ying (棖雞英; literally "Shrewish Ying"); Son's best friend.
 Peevish, boyish, but loyal, Ying is one of Shun's closest childhood friends. Ying falls in love with Shun and is a major supporter in Shun's quest to open up his multi-chain business.
     Lung (龍少爺); Son and Ying's best friend.
 Educated overseas, Lung hails from a wealthy family in Macau, and is the heir of his family business, although he prefers to work as an insurance sales agent. Despite his family business being one of the biggest rivals of Pasterilia Lo Son Kei, Fei and Son are best friends. Fei has an obvious crush on Ying, but he is supportive when Ying begins to date Son.
     Jukmui) — Sam and Shun's mother. Mui gave birth to her first-born, Kiu    Tin-seng, in Hong Kong during the late 1960s. Kiu Sum, her son's policeman    father, refuses to marry Mui after their son's birth, and in a blaze of    anger, Mui destroys her son's Hong Kong birth certificate and moves back to    her hometown in Foshan , China. There, she meets her husband, Lo    Fu-shing, and gives birth to Shing's only son, Lo Wai-shun. In 1980, Mui and    her family attempt to sneak across the Hong Kong borders to escape mainland    China's tumultuous social unrest, but the family is separated by external    forces. Mui, Shing, and Shun land in Macau, while Sam lands in Hong Kong.

 RECURRING CAST
      leader who strikes an ambiguous friendship    with Sam.     Mui's only husband, whom she met in Foshan. Shing owns a struggling peanut    brittle shop in Macau.     the second wife of Philip Cheuk.     sister.      best friend.     attracted to Sam and attempts to seduce him. Eyeing Fabio's wealth and power,    Sam eventually gives in to her seduction.     Sam's father, a Hong Kong police officer. Sum does not wish to acknowledge    his relationship with Sam in public, which indirectly influenced Sam's    decision to become a cop.     known as Kim, Sum's second son and Sam's younger half-brother.     Hounaam) — respectively Ying's father and Ying's younger brother.     Angelina Lo as Yuen Shuk-ngo (阮淑娥; Jyun Sukngo) — Fei's parents.     as K.O. Sir, Sam's mentor and Sum's biggest rival.  
 RECEPTION



 CRITICAL RESPONSE
 Brother's Keeper has received generally positive reviews from critics. On Douban , the serial received a rating of 7.7 out of 10 based on over two thousand votes. 

 RATINGS
 The following is a table that includes a list of the total ratings points based on television viewership . "Viewers in millions" refers to the number of people, derived from TVB Jade  ratings (including TVB HD Jade), in Hong Kong who watched the episode live. The peak number of viewers are in brackets.



 ACCOLADES



 TVB AWARDS PRESENTATION 2013



 EXTERNAL LINKS

  * Official TVB website 

 Jāmiʿ al-bayān ʿan taʾwīl āy al-Qurʾān (Arabic : جامع البيان عن تأويل آي القرآن, lit.  'Collection of Statements on the Interpretation of the Verses of the Qur'an', also written with fī in place of ʿan), popularly Tafsīr al-Ṭabarī (Arabic : تفسير الطبري), is a Sunni  tafsir  by the Persian  scholar Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari  (838–923).  It immediately won high regard and has retained its importance for scholars to the present day.  It is the earliest major running commentary of the Quran  to have survived in its original form.  Like his history , al-Tabari's tafsir is notable for its comprehensiveness and citation of multiple, often conflicting sources.  The book was translated into Persian  by a group of scholars from Transoxania  on commission of the Samanid  king, Mansur I  (961–976). 



 BACKGROUND


 Tabari  finished his work in 883, often dictating sections to his students.   It is his second great work after "History of the Prophets and Kings " (Tarīkh al-Rusul wa'l-Muluk), also known as "Tarikh al-Tabari".

 SOURCES


 Tabari has relied on narratives of the Islamic prophet Muhammad , including narrations and comments of sahabah  and tabi'in  where necessary. Tabari supplies the chain of narrations  for the reports included in the commentary, sometimes elaborating on the trustworthiness of narrators.
  Narratives are selected based on their authenticity; a notable example is the rejection of the same historical sources he had already used for his historical works.
 Al-Tabari incorporated an earlier commentary by ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamman al-Himyari al-San‘ani (d. 211/827) in its entirety into his work, and Heribert Horst has argued that Al-Tabari has also used other subsequently lost commentaries. 

 PREFACE


 In the preface, general facts about the Quran  are given, including its superiority to any other text, what tafsir  and tawil  are, the seven qira'at , companions who commented on the Quran and the naming of the suras .


 The language of the Quran, Arabic, is discussed and the view that there are foreign words in the Quran is rejected.
  Tabari mentions that these foreign words are coherent with Arabic, entering the Arabic language before the revelation of the Quran, and that they are very rare, and cannot be used as counter evidence that the Quran is Arabic.]

 CONTENT


 Interpretations start with "al-qawlu fī ta'wīli qawlihi ta'ālā" (English: The tawil of this word of God is) for every verse. Then hadith and other previous interpretations are stated and classified according to their compatibility to each other. Interpretation using other verses and Arabic language is favored, qualifying this tafsir as riwaya , but the inclusion of critiques and reason is an integral part of the books unique character; as Tabari has refrained from interpretation using merely his own opinion and opposed those who do so. 

 Lexical meanings of words are given, and their use in Arabic culture is examined. Tabari's linguistic views are based on the school of Basra . Opinions of linguists are given where appropriate. Evidence from Arabic poetry is used frequently, sometimes with its origins.[citation needed ]
 Tabari is also a qira'at  scholar, reflected in his opinions on qira'at debates in his book. Choices of qira'at are usually given according to the Kufa  school. Sometimes both qira'at are preserved, leaving the choice to the reader. 

 Although rare, Tabari has included isra'iliyat  occasionally in his book. Given only as notice, this information is not dwelled upon, usually left for the understanding of the reader.

 INFLUENCE


 The Tafsir gives information about older commentaries which have not survived to the present. Its content —which encompasses dictionaries, historical notes, law, recitation, theology and Arabic literature— has made it a highly referenced book throughout history, resulting in many editions. It is also a good example of reasoning in a tafsir by a widely accepted scholar, giving it a value of diraya .
 It was marked by the same fullness of detail as his other work. The size of this work and the independence of judgment in it seem to have prevented it from having a large circulation, but scholars such as Baghawi  and Suyuti  used it largely; Ibn Kathir  used it in his Tafsir ibn Kathir .  Scholars including Suyuti have expressed their admiration towards this tafsir, regarding it as the most valuable of commentaries.
  An abridgement was composed by Ibn Muṭarrif al-Ṭarafī  (d. 1062 CE). : 136  Until well into the 19th century Al-Tabari's tafsir was considered lost by Western scholars, who knew it only from fragmentary quotations. In 1860 Theodor Nöldeke  wrote: "If we had this work, we could do without all the later commentaries."


 TRANSLATION


 Mansur I , a Samanid  king who ruled in Khorasan  between 961 and 976, asked for the legal opinion (fatwa ) of jurists  on the permissibility of translating the Quran into Persian . The scholars affirmed that reading and writing the translation of the Quran in Persian was permissible for those who did not speak Arabic. Subsequently, the King ordered a group of scholars from Transoxiana  and Khorasan to translate Tafsir al-Tabari into Persian. The Persian translation of the tafsir has survived and has been published numerous times in Iran.

 EDITIONS


 Editions of Tabari's commentary on the Qur'an:
     , 1902-1903; reprinted in 1984.     published in 12 volumes by Dar al-Kutub al-'Ilmiyah, Beirut, 1997.     Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. xxxv. (1881), pp. 588–628.     being an abridged translation of Jami' al-bayan 'an ta'wil ay al-Qur'an, with    an introduction and notes by J. Cooper, general editors, W.F. Madelung, A.    Jones. Oxford University Press, 1987. The late author did not carry this    beyond the first volume. It is out of print.      0-19-920142-0 .    This is a replica of the Cooper translation.

 SEE ALSO

  * List of Sunni books 

 The clientele effect is the idea that the set of investors  attracted to a particular kind of security  will affect the price  of the security when policies or circumstances change. For instance, some investors want a company that doesn't pay dividends but instead invests that money in growing the business, whereas other investors prefer a stock that pays a high dividend, and still others want one that balances payout and reinvestment. If a company changes its dividend policy  substantially, it is said to be subject to a clientele effect as some of its investors (its established clientele) decide to sell the security due to the change. Although commonly used in reference to dividend or coupon (interest) rates, it can also be used in the context of leverage (debt levels), changes in line of business, taxes, and other aspects of the company. 
 This article needs additional citations for verification . (October 2014)

 OVERVIEW


 The clientele effect refers to the idea that certain types of investors are attracted to particular types of securities or investment vehicles. For example, a company that issues a high-yield bond may attract a different type of investor than a company that issues a low-risk, low-yield bond.
 For investors, it can be important to consider the types of securities that are likely to appeal to their desired clientele. For example, an investor who is looking for a stable, low-risk investment may be more likely to choose a bond issued by a stable, financially sound company, while an investor who is willing to take on more risk in exchange for the potential for higher returns may be more interested in a high-yield bond.
 For companies, the clientele effect can be an important consideration when deciding on the types of securities to issue.

 Slime Season is the seventh self-released mixtape by American  rapper Young Thug , released on September 16, 2015. It features production from a range of artists, including London on da Track , Metro Boomin , Ricky Racks , Wheezy , and WondaGurl , and guest appearances from Migos , Gucci Mane , Peewee Longway , and Lil Wayne .


 The mixtape was largely compiled from tracks that had leaked on the internet in the previous year.  Upon release, the mixtape received positive reviews from critics, while the single "Best Friend " charted. As well as “Best Friend”, Slime Season also included the song “Power”, which has amassed over 150 million views on YouTube as of 2020. It was followed later in the year by Slime Season 2 .

 BACKGROUND


 Slime Season was compiled from archival material in an attempt to circumvent a series of 2015 data leaks which saw hundreds of unreleased Young Thug tracks uploaded to the internet.  The material may date back at least one year.  The mixtape received a sequel, Slime Season 2 , which was released the following month. Slime Season 3  was released in 2016. The title pays homage to Ola Playa, a rapper from Young Thug's YSL Gang who released his own Slime Season mixtape in March 2014.

 CRITICAL RECEPTION



 Slime Season received critical acclaim from critics, with an aggregate score of 80 out of 100 on Metacritic .  Under the Gun called it "an abstract masterwork" and "2015's hip-hop answer to jamming sonic psychedelia .  Spin  stated that "this is simply rap’s foremost stylist mouthing off ferociously on all cylinders."  HotNewHipHop called it "just the game-changer we expected it to be, showcasing an even more confident and experimental Thugger than we heard on Barter 6 ."  Pitchfork  called the mixtape "an odds-and-ends compilation with no coherent vision," but wrote that "Thug remains one of hip-hop's most exciting stylists" and pointed out the tracks "Freaky," "Draw Down," and "Wood Would" as highlights.


 TRACK LISTING







 Imagine FM was an Independent Local Radio  station based in Stockport  broadcasting to South Manchester  and Cheshire  in the North West of England.





 HISTORY


 The station began its life as KFM , initially as a pirate local radio station  based in Stockport  and broadcasting to the South Manchester /North Cheshire  area on 94.2 MHz and then on 1017 kHz.
 KFM ran during the 1980s and then relaunched legitimately as one of the first 'incremental ' local commercial stations in 1990, set up to provide more localised and specialised programming.
 Stoke-on-Trent  based Signal Radio  assumed control of the station, following difficulties in its latter incarnation, and KFM became memorable almost solely for its 7:00 p.m. – 1:00 a.m. Night-time KFM output. This combined local and global new indie music with innovative DJing.
 Presenters on air at this time include Craig Cash , Caroline Aherne , Jon Ronson , Terry Christian  and Neil Cossar,  all of which have gone on to forge successful careers in the media and performing arts.
 KFM was succeeded by Signal Cheshire.
 Imagine FM is now trading as an independent radio station since it was bought from UTV Radio  in January 2009.

 SIGNAL CHESHIRE
 In 1990 a new service was launched, in Cheshire, on 96.4 FM called Echo 96. In 1991, this was renamed Signal Cheshire upon the acquisition of the KFM 104.9 transmitter. Based in Stockport, Signal Cheshire targeted the surrounding area of South Manchester and much of Cheshire, opting into networked programming from the Stoke-on-Trent site by night. There was a further change of identity in 1997 to Signal FM.
 In 2000, Imagine FM became the new rebranded service on 104.9 and 96.4, and when the 104.9 frequency was readvertised, the then-owners of both stations, The Wireless Group , decided that the 96.4 transmitter should return to Signal One.
 The station uses the tag line Cheshire's No.1 More Music Station and prides itself on updating the area on local news and information.
 The transmitter is based close to Stockport town centre.

 2009 SALE
 On Wednesday 21 May 2008, Ofcom  rejected a request by UTV to co-locate the station to Warrington  alongside three of its stations.  As a result of Ofcom's decision, UTV placed Imagine FM up for sale in June 2008, stating that if a buyer cannot be found by 30 June 2008 then the stations licence would be handed back to Ofcom.   The station was sold by former Imagine owners UTV Radio  in January 2009 and now trades as Imagine FM Limited. After 20 years of the 104.9 wavelength being based at Regent House, Stockport, Imagine FM moved to Waterloo Place, Stockport in November 2010 and now broadcasts from the legendary Strawberry Studios .
 The transmitter was also relocated from Romiley to Stockport centre at the same time.
 Under the ownership of the Helius Media Group, Imagine came under common ownership, and began to share programming with, High Peak Radio  in the Derbyshire dales.

 2021 SALE AND RELAUNCH
 On 17 June 2021, it was announced that Bauer Radio  would acquire the Imagine Radio services and add these to the Greatest Hits Radio  network,  further expanding GHR's coverage of both the Greater Manchester environs (following the earlier addition of Tower FM, Wish FM, Wire FM and most recently 96.2 The Revolution  to the group) and Derbyshire (where GHR already occupies the former Peak FM ).

 The Reapers' War (Catalan : Guerra dels Segadors, Eastern Calatan:  ; Spanish : Guerra de los Segadores), also known as the Catalan Revolt, was a conflict that affected the Principality of Catalonia  between the years of 1640 and 1659. It had an enduring effect in the Treaty of the Pyrenees  (1659), which ceded the County of Roussillon  and the northern half of the County of Cerdanya  to France  (see French Cerdagne ), splitting these northern Catalan territories off from the Principality of Catalonia  and the Crown of Aragon , and thereby receding the borders of Spain  to the Pyrenees .



 BACKGROUND

 This section needs additional citations for verification . (August 2022)
 de Sang (7 June 1640)
 The war had its roots in the discomfort generated in Catalan society by the presence of the royal army (made mostly of mercenaries from different nationalities) during the Franco-Spanish War  between the Kingdom of France and the Monarchy of Spain as part of the Thirty Years' War , as well the opposition of Catalan institutions to the centralised policies of the Royal Court.
 Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares , the chief minister of Philip IV , had been trying to distribute more evenly the huge economic and military burden of the Spanish Empire . But his Union of Arms  (Spanish: Union de Armas) policy raised hostilities and protests all across the states of the Monarchy of Spain. Resistance in Catalonia was especially strong; the Catalan Courts  of 1626 and 1632 were never concluded, due to the opposition of the states against the economic and military measures of Olivares, many of which violated the Catalan constitutions .
 In 1638, the canon  of La Seu d'Urgell  Pau Claris , known for his opposition to non-Catalan bishops who collaborated with the Crown, was elected by the ecclesiastic estate as president of the Generalitat , with Francesc de Tamarit  elected member of the Generalitat by the military estate and Josep-Miquel Quintana Torroella by the popular estate. Around 1639, both causes approached and the identification and solidarity of the peasants took place with the attitude of political distrust of the authorities. Thus the political doctrine of the uprising and the popular ideology of the revolt were formed.
 Claris , President of the Generalitat during the first steps of the War
 Catalan peasants, who were forced to quarter the royal army and reported events such as religious sacrileges,  destruction of personal properties and rape of women by the soldiers, responded in a series of local rebellions against their presence.
 The revolt grew, until the Corpus Christi day  of May 1640 in Barcelona, with an uprising known as 'Bloody Corpus' (Catalan: Corpus de Sang ), under the slogans "Long live the faith of Christ!", "The King our Lord has declared war on us!"  "Long live the land, death to bad government", "Reap our chains". When the bishop of Barcelona, after blessing the furious crowd, asked them: "Who is your captain? What is your flag?" They raised a big Christ on the Cross statue covered with an all black cloth and shouted "Here is our captain, this is our flag!". This 'Bloody Corpus' which began with the death of a reaper (Catalan: segador), ] and led to the assassination by Catalan rebels  of the Spanish Viceroy of Catalonia , the second Count of Santa Coloma ,  marked the beginning of the conflict. The irregular militia involved were known as "Miquelets ". The situation took Olivares by surprise, with most of the Spanish army fighting on other fronts far from Catalonia. The Council of Aragon  demanded more military presence in Barcelona as the only way to restore the order.

 CONFLICT


 Pau Claris , President  of the Generalitat of Catalonia , called the politician members of the all Principality in order to form a Junta de Braços  or Braços Generals (States-General), a consultive body. The calling was a success, and the presence of royal cities and feudal villages was exceptionally large. This assembly, which worked with individual voting, began to create and apply various revolutionary measures, such as the establishment of a Council of Defense of the Principality and a special tax for the nobility (the Batalló),  while the tension with the monarchy grew.
 At the same time, the Generalitat maintained contacts with France, in order to establish an alliance between the Principality of Catalonia and this country. By the pact of Ceret, French promised to help the Principality. In this way, the States-General presided by Pau Claris proclaimed the Catalan Republic  under the protection of the French monarchy, on 17 January 1641, which lasted a week until 21 January 1641, when they declared the French king Louis XIII  count of Barcelona . 

 of the secession of Catalonia and its integration in to France
 The threat of the French enemy establishing a powerful base south of the Pyrenees caused an immediate reaction from the Habsburg monarchy. The Habsburg government sent a large army of 26,000 men under Pedro Fajardo  to crush the Catalan Revolt. On its way to Barcelona, the Spanish army retook several cities, executing hundreds of prisoners, and a rebel army of the Catalan Republic was defeated in Martorell , near Barcelona, on 23 January. In response the Catalans reinforced their efforts and the Franco-Catalan armies obtained an important military victory over the Spanish army in the Battle of Montjuïc  (26 January 1641).
 Despite this success, the peasant uprising was becoming uncontrollable in some places, progressively focusing on the Catalan nobility and Generalitat itself. In effect, the conflict was also a class war, with the peasants revolting both against the Habsburg monarchy and against their own ruling classes, which turned to France for support.  For the next decade the Catalans fought under French vassalage, taking the initiative after Montjuïc. Meanwhile, increasing French control of political and administrative affairs (maritime ports, taxes, key bureaucratic positions, etc.) and a firm military focus on the neighbouring Spanish kingdoms of Valencia  and Aragon , in line with Richelieu 's war against Spain, gradually undermined Catalan enthusiasm for the French.
 A Franco-Catalan army under Philippe de La Mothe-Houdancourt  moved south and gained several victories against the Spanish, but the sieges of Tarragona (1644), Lleida  and Tortosa  finally failed and the allies had to withdraw.
 In the north of Catalonia in Roussillon, they were more successful. Perpignan was taken from the Spanish after a siege of 10 months , and the whole of Roussillon  was under French control. Shortly after, Spanish relief armies were defeated at the Battle of Montmeló  and Battle of Barcelona .
 In 1652, a Spanish offensive captured Barcelona  bringing the Catalan capital under Spanish control again. Irregular resistance continued for several years afterwards and some fighting took place north of the Pyrenees but the mountains would remain from then on the effective border between Spanish and French territories.
 The war was concurrent with the Arauco War  in Chile  where the Spanish fought a coalition of native Mapuches . With the Arauco War being a lengthy and costly  conflict, the Spanish crown ordered its authorities in Chile to sign a peace agreement  with the Mapuche in order to concentrate the empire's resources in fighting the Catalans. This way the Mapuche obtained a peace treaty and a recognition on behalf of the crown in a case unique for any indigenous group in the Americas.


 RESOLUTION

 of Catalonia with the resulting division
 The conflict extended beyond the Peace of Westphalia , which concluded the Thirty Years' War  in 1648 but remained part of the Franco-Spanish War (1635–1659)  with the confrontation between two sovereigns and two Generalitats, one based in Barcelona, under the control of Spain and the other in Perpinyà (Perpignan ), under the occupation of France. In 1652 the French authorities renounced Catalonia, but held control of Roussillon, thereby leading to the signing of the Treaty of the Pyrenees  in 1659.

 Spanish troops being busy in Catalonia considerably helped Portugal , on the other side of the Iberian Peninsula, in successfully shaking off Spanish rule and winning its Restoration War  at the same time.[citation needed ]

 SEE ALSO

     of Catalonia. The current lyrics are from 1899, originally based in this    revolt.     supported by Spain     from 1687–1689.     in Slovakia  from 1848 to 1849.  * Joan Pere Fontanella , Catalan judge and advocate

 Dave Becky is an American comedy talent manager  and producer . He works with 3 Arts Entertainment  and has more than 100 production credits.  He has received nine Emmy  nominations for his work as an executive producer on the Netflix  series Master of None  and various productions with comedian Louis C.K.  He has shared in two Peabody Awards  for his work as an executive producer on two FX  series, Louie  (2012) and Better Things  (2016). Becky also serves as an executive producer on Russian Doll  on Netflix  and Insecure  on HBO .


 Becky's comedy clients include Kevin Hart , Issa Rae , Natasha Lyonne , Aziz Ansari , Amy Poehler , Bill Burr  and Hannibal Buress . 
  Former clients include Louis C.K. , Pamela Adlon , John Mulaney , Nasim Pedrad   and Mitch Hedberg .

 CAREER


 Becky is an executive producer on Broad City  due to his representation of Poehler,  as well as an executive producer on Making It , Better Things , Baskets , Insecure ,  and Everybody Hates Chris . He was also executive producer of Netflix  series Master of None , co-created by Ansari, and numerous productions with then-client Louis C.K. , including the FX  television shows Louie  (credited 2013-2015) and Better Things  (co-created by C.K. and Adlon)  and comedy specials Louis C.K.: Live At The Beacon Theater (released on FX in 2012), Louis C.K.: Oh My God (2013, HBO ), Louie C.K.: Live at the Comedy Store (2015, released through C.K.'s website), and Louis C.K. 2017 (Netflix).  He was a producer on the 2017 Sony  comedy film Rough Night . 
 Regarding his management style, Becky said in a 2012 interview that he chooses clients "based on the strength of their original voice and whether that voice excites me". He further stated that his most successful clients all shared certain qualities, saying that "they are hard-working, dedicated good people, inside and out". 

 SEXUAL MISCONDUCT ALLEGATIONS AGAINST LOUIS C.K.


 In November 2017, comedian and Becky client Louis C.K.  was accused by five women of sexual misconduct  in an exposé by The New York Times ,  allegations C.K. later confirmed.  In the initial Times story, comedians Dana Min Goodman and Julia Wolov accused Becky of telling them, via their managers, not to speak about their experience of C.K. exposing himself and masturbating in front of them after a show in 2002; given Becky's influence in comedy, the then-early-career comedians feared professional reprisal.   3 Arts Entertainment subsequently dropped C.K. as a client and Becky issued a statement apologising "for not listening to and not understanding what happened to Dana and Julia", saying he had initially perceived some of the harassment allegations as a "matter of infidelity " and not as sexual misconduct. 

  Publications such as Paste  and Splitsider  called for Becky's dismissal from 3 Arts Entertainment.   Bill Burr , a client of Becky, stood by him, calling Becky "one of the great people I've met in this business".  Pamela Adlon , until then a client of Becky, severed ties with him and 3 Arts following the scandal. 
 In C.K.'s apology for the incidents, he expressed regret "that this has brought negative attention to my manager Dave Becky who only tried to mediate a situation that I caused". 

 PERSONAL LIFE


 Becky is married to talent manager Lainie Sorkin Becky. She also worked at 3 Arts Entertainment until 2005 when she joined 360 Management;  as of 2013, her clients at 360 Management included Miley Cyrus , Mary Steenburgen  and Emily Deschanel .   She became a partner in 2013. 

 The couple have three children and reside in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles. 

 AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS


 Becky has nine Emmy  nominations as an executive producer : two for Master of None  (2016 and 2017), and seven for projects with Louis C.K.  (2012–2017).

 Becky has shared in two Peabody Awards : in 2012, with six fellow members of the cast and crew of Louie  and in 2016 with 14 other members of the cast and crew of Better Things.

 Not to be confused with Anthony Modeste (French footballer) .
 Anthony Benedict Modeste (born 30 August 1975) is a retired Grenadian  football  player who represented the Grenada national football team , currently manager of Camerhogne .

 This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it
 or discuss these issues on the talk page . (Learn how and when to remove these template messages )
 This biography of a living person  needs additional citations  for verification . (July 2013)

 This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations . (July 2013)



 CLUB CAREER


 Educated at Grenada Boys' Secondary School ,  Modeste began his career at Grenadian club Queens Park Rangers SC . After seven years at the club, Modeste moved to Jamaica , signing for Hazard United  in 2002. In his first season at Hazard United, Modeste won the 2002–03 National Premier League  and JFF Champions Cup , scoring five league goals in the process, as Hazard United relocated from May Pen  to Portmore , renaming to Portmore United in 2003. In 2005, Modeste helped Portmore complete another double. In 2007, Portmore won another JFF Champions Cup, winning the league the following season . In 2011, Modeste returned to Grenada, signing for GBSS Demerara Mutual. After five seasons at the club, Modeste returned to Queens Park Rangers for a single season, before joining Camerhogne  in 2017. Modeste retired at the club in 2019.


 INTERNATIONAL CAREER


 After representing Grenada at under-15, under-20 and under-23 level,  Modeste made his debut for Grenada's senior team  on 29 March 1996, picking up a yellow card in a 2–1 win against Guyana . In total, Modeste scored 13 times for Grenada, including a four-goal haul against Dominica  on 12 March 2001.


 INTERNATIONAL GOALS
 Scores and results list Grenada's goal tally first.


 MANAGERIAL CAREER


 In 2007, Modeste was appointed manager of Grenada. During the 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup , whilst captain of the nation, Modeste took up a player-coach role in the Grenada squad.  Modeste later managed St. George Royal Cannons and Camerhogne .

 In 2022, he was appointed interim manager of the Grenada national team, reverting to his role of assistant manager following the appointment of Terry Connor  in May 2023.


 Annemieke Mein (born in 1944 at Haarlem ) is a Dutch-born Australian textile artist who specialises in depicting wildlife. She was the first textile artist to be member of Wildlife Art Society of Australasia and the Australian Guild of Realist Artists. The subjects of her sculpted textiles are birds, frogs, gum and wattle blossoms, and insects such as moths, dragonflies, wasps and grasshoppers. Her fondness for insects and her sympathetic images, often greatly enlarged and showing normally invisible colours and textures, have revealed new aspects of the everyday world.





 This biography of a living person  needs additional citations  for verification . (August 2021)

 Annemieke was the only child of a father who was a dental technician and a mother who was a skilled dressmaker, and emigrated to Melbourne  with her parents in 1951. Initially unable to speak English, she attended Brighton State School, Mitcham State School and Nunawading High School. She spent long days of her childhood roaming the outdoors and becoming fascinated by the extraordinary diversity of Australian wildlife. She sketched and collected insects, and learnt to breed and raise butterflies.
 After finishing school she enrolled for a short-lived art course at Melbourne State College and then pursued a career in nursing at the Royal Melbourne Hospital , graduating in 1967. The following year she married Phillip Mein, a general practitioner she had met at the Hospital, and in 1971 they moved to Sale  in Gippsland , Victoria with their six-month-old daughter, Joanne. Their son, Peter, was born in 1972. Her work became well-known and she was acclaimed as one of the world's foremost textile artists. In 1988 she received the Order of Australia Medal  for services to the arts.
 Annemieke holds regular workshops and freely imparts her techniques and experience to those who attend. She met Charles McCubbin (d. 2010), grandson of Frederick McCubbin , in 1979. He was one of Australia's leading naturalists and wildlife artists, and was chief consultant in the construction of the butterfly house at the Melbourne Zoo . He wrote and illustrated "Butterflies of Australia" and throughout their acquaintance shared his knowledge with Annemieke and gave his support.
 In 1984 she was commissioned to design and produce six bas-relief  bronzes for permanent display on a wall of fame  in Sale. The bronzes featured Alfred William Howitt , Mary Grant Bruce , Ada Crossley , Allan McLean , Angus McMillan  and Nehemiah Guthridge . In 1987 the town fathers of Bendigo  commissioned a bas-relief of Henry Backhaus , the first priest to visit the Victorian goldfields . In 2007 Mein was the subject of a major survey exhibition at the Gippsland Art Gallery , which also holds a large number of her works in its permanent collection.
 Her 1992 book The Art of Annemieke Mein, gives a rare insight into the creative process that is necessary for producing works of art that delight both the artist and the viewer. The illustrations offer a comprehensive cross-section of her textile pieces.
 She suffers from cryptogenic sensory neuropathy , an autoimmune condition which has made it difficult for her to continue working.

 In March 2024 Annemieke will be the subject of a major sixty-year retrospective exhibition called 'A Life's Work', to be staged at Gippsland Art Gallery  in the regional town of Sale, Victoria , which will be accompanied by a new book about her art and life.

 Dummerston is a town in Windham County, Vermont , United States. The population was 1,865 at the 2020 census .  It is home to the longest covered bridge  still in use in Vermont. Its borders include three main villages: Dummerston Center, West Dummerston, and East Dummerston.





 HISTORY

 Dummerston in 1913
 According to the book 1491 by Charles Mann, Dummerston was stolen from Native Americans by Europeans.
 Dummerston was part of the Equivalent Lands —several large sections of land given to settlers in the early eighteenth century. It lies on a tract  given to the Connecticut Colony  about 1715 by the Province of Massachusetts Bay  as compensation for land mistakenly awarded by the latter to its settlers. In 1716, the town was auctioned to a consortium  (which included William Dummer , lieutenant governor of Massachusetts), and named Dummerston. On December 26, 1753, the town was chartered as a New Hampshire grant  and renamed Fulham  by Governor Benning Wentworth . But when the grant was renegotiated, it reverted to Dummerston.

 The many brooks and streams flowing into the West River  provided the area with water power. Dummerston had five gristmills, five sawmills, one slate manufacturer, and one shop for making rakes. Raising sheep across the many hills was an important occupation.  By 1859, the town had a population of 1,645. The Vermont Valley Railroad  passed through Dummerston. 
 A house built in Dummerston in 1892, Naulakha , was home to author Rudyard Kipling . This is where he wrote several of his novels, including The Jungle Books  and Captains Courageous . 
 There was a covered bridge that was built in 1812, and it moved to Old Sturbridge Village  in 1946.

 GEOGRAPHY


 According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 30.8 square miles (79.8 km2), of which 30.6 square miles (79.2 km2) is land and 0.2 square mile (0.6 km2) (0.71%) is water. Dummerston is bounded by the Connecticut River , and the West River flows through the town. 
 The town is crossed by Interstate 91  (Exit 4 serves the town and the exit sits on the border of Dummerston and Putney ), U.S. Route 5  and Vermont Route 30 . It is bordered by Brattleboro  to the south, Marlboro  and Newfane  to the west, with Putney and Brookline  to the north. Chesterfield, New Hampshire  lies across the Connecticut River from it.

 DEMOGRAPHICS



 As of the census  of 2000, there were 1,915 people, 796 households, and 543 families residing in the town. The population density was 62.6 people per square mile (24.2/km2). There were 893 housing units at an average density of 29.2 per square mile (11.3/km2). The racial makeup of the town was 98.33% White , 0.05% African American , 0.63% Asian , 0.05% from other races , and 0.94% from two or more races. Hispanic  or Latino  of any race were 0.57% of the population.
 There were 796 households, out of which 31.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.0% were married couples living together, 6.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.7% were non-families. Of all households 25.4% were made up of individuals, and 6.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.89.
 In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.1% under the age of 18, 5.1% from 18 to 24, 26.8% from 25 to 44, 31.1% from 45 to 64, and 13.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.1 males.
 The median income for a household in the town was $46,121, and the median income for a family was $53,375. Males had a median income of $35,664 versus $26,174 for females. The per capita income for the town was $23,742. About 1.1% of families and 2.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.7% of those under age 18 and 6.5% of those age 65 or over.

 POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT


 Dummerston, like many New England  counties and localities, uses a board of selectmen  as its executive body  and Town Meeting  for legislative  functions. In 2014, it had five selectmen forming up its selectboard.  One of its most famous selectmen was Motel 6  spokesmodel and author Tom Bodett , who served on the selectboard as of 2013.


 SITES OF INTEREST

 in 1872, the West Dummerston Covered Bridge  has a floor length of 267 feet (81 m)
 Dummerston has several interesting sites within its borders.
 The longest covered bridge  that is still in use in the state of Vermont is the West Dummerston Covered Bridge . Built in two spans which rest on a central pier, the bridge boasts a combined length of 267 feet along the floor. The gable ends overhang the floor at each end of the bridge by two feet; therefore, along the top of the trusses, the bridge is 271 feet long.

 Dummerston is home to the 1,009 acre Black Mountain Conservation Area. Black Mountain rises abruptly from the West River into a horseshoe-shaped ridge. The mountain has a summit of 1,280 feet. 
 Author Rudyard Kipling made Dummerston home, building a house that he named Naulakha . It was there that he wrote his famous story, The Jungle Book , and invented the sport of Snow Golf . Naulakha is now a museum available for overnight stays. The house is a National Historic Landmark .

 The Dummerston Grange periodically hosts the Vermont Theatre Company.


 NOTABLE PEOPLE

            screenwriter Frances H. Flaherty  and filmmaker and    producer     screenwriter      investor, janitor, and gas station attendant  * Charles Sweetser , U.S. congressman

 Alexander Moosbrugger (born 21 August 1972 in Bregenzerwald ) is an Austrian Composer , living since 2001 in Berlin .



 BIOGRAPHY


 Alexander Moosbrugger completed studies at the Vorarlberger Landeskonservatorium (organ and harpsichord), at the Universität Wien  (Philosophy) and at the Staatliche Hochschule für Musik und Darstellende Kunst Stuttgart .

 CHARACTERISTIC MUSICAL CONCERNS


 Moosbrugger's work encompasses a fine differentiation of the entire soft dynamic range. He primarily is writing in chamber ensemble settings, rarely doubled, preferring among other genres the string quartet. In the foreground of a composition Moosbrugger interweaves auditory and non-auditory sources, establishing musical relations through translations of historical, sociopolitical and private points of reference, analysis of symbolic functions, the devising of intonations, and "reconceived instrumental practices". Playing techniques manifest the "speaking" of musical images and are devised anew in each piece, or series of works. 
 His compositions are internationally played, for example in the Konzerthaus Berlin  or at King's College, Cambridge , in festivals of contemporary music (2013 at the London Ear Festival,  Forum Neue Musik Luzern) and in ensemble concert series.  Among interpreters of his music are Klangforum Wien , ensemble recherche , Ensemble Phoenix Basel, Kammerensemble Neue Musik Berlin , Ensemble Cairn Paris, musikFabrik , Ensemble L'arsenale, das Arditti String Quartet , Pellegrini Quartet , Herbert Henck.

 WORKS

     taken from the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili  in the    translation by Joscelyn Godwin  and Thomas Reiser     (2021)      clarinet, percussion, piano, violin and violoncello ,    fonds and turntable (2012-2013)       de Grigny, transcribed for ensemble – oboe, clarinet, bassoon, trumpet,    trombone, tuba, string quartet (2010)     Ménilmontant, Saint-Sulpice, La Trinité (2010)        confetti shooters (2008)       violoncello, percussion, 8 medicine ball players (2007)       (scordatura C/G1), percussion (2005)       flute, soprano, clarinet, percussion, church bells (St. Gallus, Bregenz),    ensemble on period instruments for early music (baruque trumpet, violin,    viola, violoncello, theorbo), ensemble with 12 players (flute, oboe,     bassoon, French horn, cornetto, trombone, percussion, violin 1,    violin 2, viola, violoncello, contrabass), MIDI controlled organ pipe D 32’    (2001)

 RESEARCH AND CURATORIAL PROJECTS


 Moosbrugger's concern with "Listening/Hearing" as compositional arena motivated studies in philosophy at the Universität Wien . Since then, he researches and works with aspects of hearing as sounding reflections about the history of philosophy.  For the Orpheus Instituut in Ghent Moosbrugger led „Gespräche zum Hören“ with Rebecca Saunders , Georg Friedrich Haas  and Salvatore Sciarrino .  Teaching and guest lectures at the Anton Bruckner Privatuniversität   and Universität der Künste Berlin . 
 Moosbrugger initiated and curated the festival reihe 0 – Tage aus Kunst from 2000 until 2008, and since 2007 is Artistic Director of the Bludenzer Tage zeitgemäßer Musik .

 AWARDS, RECOGNITION


 Alexander Moosbrugger has received divers stipendia, among them the International Bodenseepreis Sparte Zeitgenössische Komposition, the Austrian state stipend for composition as well as the composition prize of the Land Vorarlberg.  Moosbrugger was Artist in Residence in the Domus Artium near Rome and resident artist in the Centro Tedesco di Studi Veneziani. 
 In this Malay name , there is no surname or family name . The name Mahali is a patronymic , and the person should be referred to by their given name : Suhandi.
 Soldadu  Muhammad Suhandi bin Haji Awang Mahali (born 4 May 1985) is a Bruneian  footballer  who last played for MS ABDB  of the Brunei Super League  as a goalkeeper .  He is a five-time Brunei FA Cup  winner and a member of ABDB's championship squad on two occasions. 



 CLUB CAREER


 Suhandi was part of the QAF FC  squad in 2004.  He started playing for the football team of his employers the Brunei army  in 2008.  He won the majority of his FA Cup medals in his early years while competing the goalkeeper spot with Tarmizi Johari ,  but they were luckless in the league that was dominated by QAF FC  and later Indera SC . 
 On 1 February 2013, Suhandi scored a penalty in the 82nd minute in the 2012–13 Brunei Super League  game against Najip FC which finished 11–1 to MS ABDB.  This made Suhandi the third goalkeeper to score a goal in a league fixture in Brunei, after Fakhrul Zulhazmi Yussof  and Mu'izzuddin Ismail .
 MS ABDB started the 2014 Brunei Super League  with a 3–2 loss to LLRC FT on 2 February.  Days later Tarmizi Johari, who had started the game, signed a professional contract with DPMM FC , enabling Suhandi to become the starting goalkeeper for the Armymen.  In his third league match, he let in a free kick by Syarafuddin Hamdi Talip  slip between his legs in a 0–1 reverse at the hands of MS PDB .  These two defeats along with another loss to eventual champions Indera SC  a month later would cost ABDB the title with Suhandi only keeping five clean sheets in 15 appearances.  (Another clean sheet was attributed to Zulfadhli Matassan as Suhandi served a suspension for a red card against Majra FC. )
 At the start of the 2015 season  Suhandi found himself replacing Tarmizi as the third-choice keeper behind Wardun Yussof  and Azman Ilham Noor  in the DPMM ranks.  This turned into an uneventful stint for Suhandi, failing to make a single appearance even on the bench, while back at ABDB Tarmizi managed to finally win the league with only four points dropped in the 2015 Brunei Super League .  Suhandi was released from DPMM in early 2016 along with Amalul Said . 
 Suhandi returned to the MS ABDB ranks in late 2016, but by that time there were already three keepers in the squad along with the signing of former youth international Burhanuddin Edy Asmady earlier in the year.  Nevertheless, he managed to appear in four matches for the 2017–18 season  (another title-winning season for MS ABDB) before being deregistered soon after.


 INTERNATIONAL CAREER


 Suhandi made his international debut for the Brunei national team as a substitute on 26 September 2012 against Indonesia national football team  in a 5–0 loss, playing the last 15 minutes of the game.  He was listed by the Wasps for the 2012 AFF Championship qualification  matches in the following month, but did not make the cut.


 HONOURS

 MS ABDB     , 2017–18   * Brunei FA Cup  (5): 2007–08, 2010, 2012–13, 2014–15, 2016

 This article lists the notable gangs , security threat groups, criminal enterprises and related syndicates which participate in organized crime  within various parts of Canada . Some of these organizations are based elsewhere (in other countries), but have members, chapters and/or operations set up in Canada.



 MULTIRACIAL GROUPS

 See also: 2009 Vancouver gang war       Caucasian, Asian, black, native)      gangs and individuals involved in the narcotics trade based in the east end    of London, Ontario. These neighborhood gangs are linked together by London    Police Service  into a single entity known as EOA    due to the fact that they are mostly all connected to the same supplier. The    city's largest organized crime group as a whole.                        gang. Operates in the North-east of London.                       London, Ontario.      Alliance)          taxation of other groups in the area involved in the narcotics trade.         Indo-Canadian, and Persian (member of the Dhak-Dhure-UN Alliance)

 ABORIGINAL-BASED

 Main article: Aboriginal-based organized crime (Canada)
               whole.]                                      

 BLACK/AFRICAN-CANADIAN 

 See also: List of Crips subgroups § Canada          
   
  

      

                                                                                                                                     

 CARIBBEAN

     origin          Mostly of Jamaican origin.         the city of Toronto       Mostly of Afroamerican and Jamaican origin.    

 EASTERN ASIAN, TRIADS AND TONGS

                                   

 EUROPEAN-CANADIAN  AND WHITE SUPREMACIST

 See also: Ku Klux Klan in Canada       established in 1974, one of their Canadian leaders, Camey Nerland was    sentenced to prison after he pled guilty for killing a native American, seen    as a part of the Canadian Brotherhood.         organization involved in hate crimes and pipe bombings, and is believed to be    active again.         organization located on the West Coast, the group went to trial in 1992, due    to its treatment of Jews and "non-whites".         Brotherhood , active in Canadian prison system       graffiti crew based in Saskatchewan     responsible for creating a multibillion-dollar international narcotics    trafficking empire.     group          participant in the "Spryfield War"         participant in the "Spryfield War"         organisation involved in organized crime        group with 8 chapters in Canada       (BSG)– London,    Ontario based Neo-Nazi group      group      – A branch of the KKK operating    in Canada.       and created chapters in Canada with operation Maple leaf in 1993.          gang          gang - violent - some members support hells angels

 HISPANIC-CANADIAN 

     Hondurans, Guatemalans)                       Latinos)                                          

 INDO-CANADIAN 

 Main article: Indo-Canadian organized crime      Minnesota (a part of the Wolfpack Gang Alliance)                                  Eastern Canada & US with international criminal ties                     crime gang active across Canada (a part of the Wolfpack Gang Alliance)             (formerly a member of the Wolfpack Alliance)                         
 ITALIAN-CANADIAN 

     .              Family.     
 MIDDLE EASTERN

     

 OUTLAW MOTORCYCLE CLUBS 

                                                                           

 Ștefănești (Yiddish : שטעפנשט, Hebrew : שטפנשט) is a small town  in Botoșani County , Western Moldavia , Romania . It administers four nearby villages: Bădiuți, Bobulești, Stânca and Ștefănești-Sat.
 This article needs additional citations for verification . (January 2011)


 The town is located near the point where the Bașeu River  discharges into the Prut River , on the shore of the Stânca-Costești reservoir. Stânca is a border checkpoint with Moldova , connected via the Stânca-Costești Dam  to the town of Costești , Moldova .

 DEMOGRAPHICS


 According to the 2021 census , Ștefănești has a population of 5,032.  At the census from 2011 , the town had a population of 5,092; of those, 90.57% were ethnic Romanians  and 9.3% ethnic Romani . 

 NATIVES


 The painter Ștefan Luchian  (1868–1916) was born here, as well as Vlad Onicescu, the father of the mathematician Octav Onicescu  (1892–1983). The town is also the birthplace of the Shtefanesht Hasidic dynasty  and as such its name is still known in present-day Israel .
 Not to be confused with the International Court of Justice .
 The International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) is an international human rights  non-governmental organization . It is a standing group of 60 eminent jurists—including senior judges, attorneys and academics—who work to develop national and international human rights standards through the law. Commissioners are known for their experience, knowledge and fundamental commitment to human rights. The composition of the Commission aims to reflect the geographical diversity of the world and its many legal systems.


 The commission is supported by an International Secretariat based in Geneva , Switzerland , and staffed by lawyers  drawn from a wide range of jurisdictions and legal traditions. The Secretariat and the Commission undertake advocacy and policy work aimed at strengthening the role of lawyers and judges  in protecting and promoting human rights  and the rule of law .
 In addition, the ICJ has national sections and affiliates in over 70 countries. Given the legal focus of the ICJ's work, membership of these sections is predominantly drawn from the legal profession.
 In April 2013, the ICJ was presented with the Light of Truth Award  by the Dalai Lama  and the International Campaign for Tibet . The award is presented to organisations who have made outstanding contributions to the Tibetan cause. 
 The current ICJ President is Professor Robert Goldman. Former Presidents include Sir Nigel Rodley  (2012-2017), a former member of the UN Human Rights Committee , Professor Pedro Nikken  (2011-2012) and Mary Robinson  (2008-2011), the former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights  and President of Ireland .

 CURRENT ACTIVITIES


 The ICJ is active in promoting human rights and the rule of law, whether at the international level (e.g. the UN), regionally (e.g. the EU  and Council of Europe ), or domestically through the activities of its national sections (e.g. JUSTICE  in the UK).
 The ICJ's International Law and Protection Programme works to promote the application of international law to violations of a civil, political, social or economic nature.  The focus is on the international obligations of states to respect, protect, and fulfill human rights through the Rule of Law, to protect victims of human rights violations, and to hold states and non-state actors accountable for these violations and abuses. Today, the specific areas of work include:
      ;      ;       .
 The ICJ also operates regional programmes of work in Africa , Asia Pacific , Central America , Europe , and the Middle East  and North Africa .  These focus on promoting and supporting the independence of the judiciary, the Rule of Law and human rights issues specific to their regional contexts. To support this work, the ICJ has regional offices in Thailand, South Africa, and Guatemala, and country office in Nepal and North Africa.

 HISTORY


 Born at the ideological frontline of a divided post-war Berlin, the ICJ was established following the 1952 ‘International Congress of Jurists’ in West Berlin . The Congress was organized by the ‘Investigating Committee of Free Jurists (ICJF)’, a group of German jurists committed to investigating human rights abuses carried out in the Soviet Zone of post-war Germany.
 During the Congress, delegates decided to make provisions to expand the work of the ICJF to investigate human rights violations in other regions of the world. A five-member ‘Standing Committee of the Congress’ was appointed for this purpose and, in 1953, the Standing Committee created the “International Commission of Jurists (ICJ)” as a permanent organisation dedicated to the defence of human rights through the rule of law.
 One of the key areas of concern for the 106 Congress delegates was the case of Dr. Walter Linse , a West German lawyer and the Acting President of the ICJF. Two weeks prior to the start of the Congress, on 8 July 1952, in an apparent attempt to intimidate participants, Dr. Linse was abducted by East German intelligence agents and delivered to the KGB . Despite international condemnation of the abduction, Dr. Linse was executed in Moscow  for “espionage” in 1953.[citation needed ]
 In 1955, the ICJ issued a report entitled Under False Colours in which it stated that "the International Association of Democratic Lawyers and its subsidiaries proceed from a principle which is diametrically opposed to those which form the basis of the Commission’s work. Although it is careful not to pronounce itself openly on the subject, the International Association of Democratic Lawyers defends and supports the principles of Soviet-Communism."
 The ICJ was initially partially funded by the Central Intelligence Agency  through the American Fund for Free Jurists, but the CIA's role was not known to most of the ICJ's members.  American founders like Allen Dulles  and John J. McCloy  conceived it as a counter to the International Association of Democratic Lawyers , which had been set up by leftist French lawyers with connections to the French resistance . : 62  Ex-CIA officer Philip Agee  considered that the ICJ was "set up and controlled by the CIA for propaganda operations."  The CIA funding became public in 1967, but the organization survived the revelations after a period of reform under Secretary General Seán MacBride , and through Ford Foundation  funding.
  MacBride himself was involved in CIA funding, according to information the US government reported.

 From 1970 to 1990, Niall MacDermot  was Secretary-General, succeeding Seán MacBride .  MacDermot moved the ICJ away from its association with the CIA, to the forefront of the international human rights movement.

 In 1978, the ICJ established the Centre for the Independence of Judges and Lawyers (CIJL). It was instrumental in the formulation and adoption of the UN Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary  and the UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers and its mandate is to work for their implementation.
 In 1980, the ICJ received the European Human Rights Prize  by Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe .
 In 1986, the ICJ gathered a group of distinguished experts in international law  to consider the nature and scope of the obligations of States parties to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights . The meeting witnessed the birth of the Limburg Principles on the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which continue to guide international law in the area of economic, social and cultural rights.
 In the 1990s, a number of important international developments took place as a result of initiatives by the ICJ. These included the UN Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the recommendation by the Programme of Action of the World Conference on Human Rights  in Vienna to work on the setting up of an International Criminal Court . This was the direct result of an international conference on impunity, organised by the ICJ under the auspices of the United Nations in 1992, which adopted an appeal asking the Vienna conference to "set up an international penal tribunal…in order to finally break the cycle of impunity". In November 2006 the ICJ held an international meeting in Yogyakarta  for LGBT rights  and published The Yogyakarta Principles  in March 2007.
 The ICJ also initiated the drafting of the set of Principles for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights through Action to Combat Impunity and the Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Violations of International Human Rights and Humanitarian Law, both under examination at the UN Human Rights Commission  and also received the United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights  in 1993.

 NATIONAL SECTIONS


 As at 2015 there are 21 autonomous  National Sections of the ICJ.  They are:
                       
 CONGRESSES OF THE ICJ


 Every few years, the ICJ convenes a World Congress, where jurists from around the world work together to address a pressing human rights issue and agree normative principles and objectives in a public Declaration. These Declarations have frequently been used by inter-governmental bodies, including the United Nations, as well as bar associations, lawyers, academic centres and other human rights NGOs around the world. For example, the ICJ was responsible for the Declaration of Delhi  on the rule of law  in 1959, which set out the ICJ's conception of the Rule of Law as being dynamic. 
 The ICJ's most recent Declaration, agreed at the ICJ's 17th World Congress in December 2012, related to Access to Justice and Right to a Remedy in International Human Rights Systems.  The full list of ICJ Congresses is as follows:

     International Human Rights Systems     & Lawyers in times of crisis     Combating Terrorism       of Lawyers          Pressures      
 SEE ALSO

                * JUSTICE 

 Bremen Castings, Inc (BCI) is a 4th generation family owned manufacturer of machined complete gray & ductile iron castings for heavy truck, valves & pipe fittings, pump components, compressors, lawn/garden equipment, and military contract work. BCI is headquartered in Bremen, Indiana .



 HISTORY


 Bremen Gray Iron Foundry was founded on March 17, 1939 by Ellis Brown, Charles W. Kling, and Harold Heckamen. The foundry originally produced fire pots, stove parts, furnace, shaker, and laundry grates for its customers. Suppliers included Hurwich Iron where they purchased cupola/steel materials, I.O. Pfeiffer Construction who helped build the foundry and install equipment, and Koontz Hardware where various supplies were purchased. All of these early suppliers are still in business today and continue to have close relationships with BCI.

 In 1972, the company changed its name to Bremen Castings, Inc.

 Starting in the mid-1990s, Bremen Castings started to expand beyond casting. The foundry's machine shop opened in 1996 and the tool shop opened in 2009.

 BCI Defense began in December 2012  and currently manufacturers firearms and Firearm  parts from 7075 aluminium alloy ,  specifically the AR-15 style rifle .    

 MACHINING


 In 1996 BCI launched its own internal machine shop with the new addition of a 15,000-square-foot (1,400 m2) facility to the existing foundry with the expectations to diversify across many markets. This forced quality and engineering to grow to be diverse in both machining and foundry. This gives BCI the advantage for both departments to communicate before the product launch for a lower total start up cost. BCI purchased its first CNC  machines in 1996 and now has over 17 CNC machines in its arsenal.
 BCI continues to grow. In 2011 BCI opened its 55,000 SFT facility to house all machine centers and host all assemblies.
 Bremen Castings also creates prototypes using solidification software and runs solidification simulations as a means of scrap reduction.

 FOUNDRY


 Bremen Castings foundry produces castings made from recycled materials such as plate and structural steel and old cast products. A Cupola and medium frequency furnaces are used at the foundry for melting recycled materials to be poured into green sand molds produced by match plate molding machines. Once the metal has been cast and shaken out, the products flow through the state of the art cleaning room (mill room) then on its way to the CNC machining centers.

 ENGINEERING


 To help design casting models, BCI also creates prototypes and production models using MagmaSoft solidification software. The engineers are able to pre-determine scrap issues prior to production with solidification simulations and as a result they have been able to reduce the amount of scrap produced at start up of a new product launch.
 The engineers at Bremen Castings are a full production staff handling product design, steel weldment conversions and existing products. All tooling and fixtures can be designed and built in house. BCI Engineering software consists of: MagmaSoft Solidification software, Vero Software  (Visi), and CAD/CAM/CAE software for aiding the design and manufacturing process.

 STATUS QUO SUCKS


 The Status Quo Sucks (SQS) team was created to lead BCI in its goal to implement Lean Practices and eliminate waste throughout the organization. By incorporating a cultural change to a team concept, each individual at BCI has an ownership of sustainability and improvement with everything the employee touches. When the SQS team launches an improvement project, a well rounded team is assembled and a problem or situation is strategically attacked and resolved through a group effort.

 RECYCLING


 BCI has been Bremen's  largest recycling plant and product producer by weight. In an effort to reduce paper usage and to increase productivity, BCI has adopted a paperless office  policy, and as of 2011, BCI has eliminated 85% of paper waste through technology such as iPad , iPhone , iPod , floor monitors, and electronic filing cabinet software.

 Canal 2 is a Nicaraguan  free-to-air  television network  owned by Televicentro de Nicaragua, S.A., owned by the Mexican  media mogul Remigio Ángel González . In theory, the channel's sister channels are those of Grupo Ratensa , but in practice, the channel is an independent operation with support from the Nicaraguan government.

 This article needs additional citations for verification . (April 2022)



 HISTORY


 Televicentro de Nicaragua, S.A. was founded in December 1965 by Octavio Sacasa Sarria and started broadcasting in March 1966. It was the third television channel in Nicaragua after Channel 6, owned by the Somoza  family. Televicentro started broadcasting in colour in 1973.
 With the triumph of the Sandinista  revolution in July 1979, Channel 2 together with Channel 6 were expropriated by the Sandinista government and turned into the Sistema Sandinista de Televisión  (SSTV), the Sandinista Television System. Channel 2 returned to its original owners at the end of 1989.
 In 1996, Channel 2 became the first Central American TV channel to have an official web site. Canal 2 also broadcasts from relay-transmitter channel 7 in some parts of the country.
 In 2005, Televicentro signed an agreement with Channel 33 from Costa Rica  to broadcast the evening transmissions of Noticiero 22-22 in that country.
 In 2006, the channel started streaming broadcasts.
 outside van at the Saint Blas Church at Chichigalpa , 2015
 In late 2011, Octavio Sacasa said that "the channel is not for sale", amid rising concerns that Televicentro's sale to Albavisión was finalized, as other versions of the same story have been circulating in business circles, about alleged advanced negotiations between Sacasa and Ángel González. González and Sacasa were business partners in the USA in the 80s, until becoming arch-rivals in the early 90s, when Sacasa reassumed control of Televicentro.

 In 2014, the channel's news operation (TVNoticias) was taken over by Maurice Ortega, aligning it with the government's viewpoint.

 In 2015, the channel was definitely sold to Albavisión, as an independent operation from Grupo Ratensa, even though Carlos Pastora from Canal 10 was still managing the channel. González owned the channel by means of one of his figurehead subsidiaries, TV Móvil, in what was considered to be another "blow" to democracy in Nicaragua, and was even condemned by the Nicaraguan Catholic Church. This maneuver allowed the Ortega-Murillo family to have absolute control of the television station and expand the number of media outlets, in exchange for a repeater television frequency for González (channel 7).


 PROGRAMMING


 As of April 2022: 

 NEWSCASTS
     editions at 1:00 p.m., 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. and with short bulletins on    weekends.     
 FOREIGN SOAP OPERAS
         
 FOREIGN TV SERIES
         
 REALITYS
      
 KIDS
                                  
 TV MOVIES
  
 ORIGINAL PRODUCTIONS
  
 SPECIAL EVENTS
  
 FORMER PROGRAMMING

 LOCAL
        
 IMPORTED
                  * Contra corriente (serie)

 Admiral Thomas Boulton Fargo AO  (born June 13, 1948)  served in the United States Navy  during the late 20th century and early 21st century. He served as Commander, United States Pacific Command , at Camp H. M. Smith , Hawaii  from May 2, 2002 to February 26, 2005. He was the twentieth officer to hold the position.



 BIOGRAPHY


 Born in San Diego, California , in June 1948, Fargo attended high school in Coronado, California , and Sasebo, Japan , and graduated from the United States Naval Academy  in June 1970.
 His father, Thomas A. Boulton, was a naval officer who was killed in a plane crash in 1957. His mother, Helen, remarried in 1960 to Captain William Fargo, US Navy. Helen was a Lieutenant in the US Navy Nurse Corps during World War II; both Thomas and William graduated from the Naval Academy (Class of 1943 and Class of 1939, respectively.) 
 Trained in joint, naval and submarine  commands, Fargo served in a variety of sea and shore duty assignments. At sea, his five assignments in both attack  and ballistic missile submarines  included Executive Officer  aboard Plunger  and Commanding Officer  of Salt Lake City . While commander of the Salt Lake City, Fargo hosted aboard several members of the cast of the movie The Hunt for Red October  as they were researching their roles as submarine crew members. He served as Commander, Submarine Group SEVEN, Commander Task Force SEVEN FOUR, and Commander Task Force ONE FIVE SEVEN in the Western Pacific, Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf  from 1992 to 1993. He commanded the United States FIFTH Fleet  and Naval Forces of the Central Command during two years of Iraqi contingency operations from July 1996 to July 1998. Fargo served as the 29th Commander in Chief, U.S. Pacific Fleet  from October 1999 to May 2002.
 Ashore, Fargo served in the Bureau of Naval Personnel  and with the Commander in Chief, U.S. Atlantic Fleet  and has had multiple assignments in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations. After his selection to Flag rank  in 1994, Admiral Fargo has served as Director of Operations (J-3), U.S. Atlantic Command during the Haiti  intervention; as Director, Assessment Division (N-81) for the Chief of Naval Operations; and the Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Plans, Policy and Operations (N3/N5).
 While serving as Commander of the U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM), Fargo informed the United States Congress  of his plans to retire from the Navy. Although an Air Force  flag officer was nominated to succeed him, the Senate  declined to confirm the nominee, as it was customary to fill that post with a Navy flag officer. President Bush  accordingly extended Fargo's mandatory retirement  date. Fargo ultimately retired from military service in 2005, when the Senate confirmed Admiral William J. Fallon  to succeed him as Commander of USPACOM.[citation needed ]
 Admiral Fargo is a 1989 recipient of the Vice Admiral James Bond Stockdale Award for Inspirational Leadership . His personal decorations include the Distinguished Service Medal  (four awards), the Defense Superior Service Medal , and the Legion of Merit  (three awards). In February 2005 he was appointed an honorary Officer of the Order of Australia  "for distinguished naval service, particularly for strengthening the Australia-United States alliance whilst Commander United States Pacific Command".

 In 2010, the National Bureau of Asian Research  appointed Fargo as the second holder of the Shalikashvili Chair  in National Security Studies.

 In 2019, Fargo became the 22nd chairman of USAA .


 AWARDS AND DECORATIONS


 United States Pacific Command  Badge
 Gold star Gold star Gold star Navy Distinguished Service Medal  with 3 gold award stars  Defense Superior Service Medal  Gold star Gold star Legion of Merit  with 2 award stars Gold star Gold star Meritorious Service Medal  with 2 award stars Navy Commendation Medal  Gold star Navy Achievement Medal  with award star Joint Meritorious Unit Award  Navy Unit Commendation  Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation  Navy "E" Ribbon  Navy Expeditionary Medal  Bronze star Bronze star National Defense Service Medal  with 2 bronze service stars  Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal  Bronze star Vietnam Service Medal  with service star Bronze star Bronze star Navy Sea Service Deployment Ribbon  with two service stars Navy & Marine Corps Overseas Service Ribbon  Honorary Officer of the Order of Australia  (Military Division)

 THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER


 Admiral Fargo served as the inspiration for the character of Commander Bart Mancuso in the film The Hunt for Red October . Scott Glenn  spent several days preparing for his role aboard the Salt Lake City . It was during this time that he decided to base his portrayal of his character on then-Commander Fargo.

 Fargo had told Glenn, "I've given orders to all the men on board to treat you as equal rank with me so every time for the next few days while we are out, when someone comes up and reports to me, they are going to turn around and report to you, and I'm going to tell you what we are going to do about it. There may be once or twice that I'm going to ask you to go to your quarters when we are dealing with stuff that is top secret."

 "Tom Fargo was a strong, tough commander, but he had a degree of relaxation and looseness that I never would have expected." – Scott Glenn.

 "He was incredibly confident...he was this guy you would follow into hell." – Alec Baldwin . 

 St. Petersburg Bar Association is a voluntary Bar Association  located in St. Petersburg , Pinellas County, Florida . The St. Petersburg Bar Association currently has over 1,200 members. Membership includes lawyers , judges , students  and affiliate members who have a relationship with the legal profession .

 This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it
 or discuss these issues on the talk page . (Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) This article relies excessively on references  to primary sources . (November 2010)
 This article relies largely or entirely on a single source . (November 2010)
 The St. Petersburg Bar Association provides continuing legal education  programs and networking  opportunities for the legal community, and also provides legal programming for the general public. Additionally, the Bar Association, along with the St. Petersburg Bar Foundation, offers a Young Lawyer Section Essay scholarship  and the Judge Paul H. Roney Law Day Essay Contest scholarship for graduating Pinellas County high school  seniors. Other scholarships and grants  are available through the St. Petersburg Bar Foundation.
 Many of the members of the Bar Association provide pro bono  legal service and are very involved in other community volunteer  activities. Various other free legal services are available in the St. Petersburg community through the Community Law Program, Bay Area Legal Services and Gulf Coast Legal Services.

 REFERENCES


 http://www.stpetebar.com 

 EXTERNAL LINKS

  * http://www.stpetebar.com

 Saint Donatus (second half of 8th century Zadar  – first half of 9th century), also called Donato of Zara, was a Dalmatian saint who became a bishop  and a diplomat  for the Dalmatian city-state  of Zadar (Zara). His feast day is celebrated on 25 February.

 of St. Donatus  in Zadar 
 Donatus is mentioned in Frankish  annals from 805 as an ambassador of the Dalmatian cities to Charlemagne  in Thionville . Donatus is credited for initiating either construction or expansion of the Church of the Holy Trinity. The church was completed in the beginning of the 9th century and in the 15th century. Its name was later changed by the Venetians to the Church of St. Donatus .


 DONATUS'S CHURCH


 The church is the largest Pre-Romanesque building in Croatia, and was built upon the ruin of the old Roman forum,  part of the forum's foundations can be seen today.
 The marble sarcophagus  in the cathedral preserves the relics of the Sirmian  martyr St. Anastasia  with an inscription dating from Donatus' time. According to tradition, St. Donatus brought the relics to Zara from Constantinople, when he was there with the Venetian  duke Beato. They had been ordered by Charlemagne to negotiate the border  between the Byzantine Empire  and the Croatian  territories that were under the dominion of Charlemagne's Frankish Empire .
 Donatus died around 811, and was buried in his Church of the Holy Trinity (today the Church of St. Donatus). After 1809, following the French occupation of Zadar, his bones were transferred to the Cathedral of St. Anastasia  where they lie to this date, and mass has not been celebrated at the church for around two centuries.

 Panchuara (also known as Pachhwara) is a village in Amrapara  CD block  in Pakur subdivision of Pakur district  in the Indian  state  of Jharkhand .





 GEOGRAPHY

 /wiki/Special:Map/9/24.85/87.55/en

 Cities, towns and locations in the Sahibganj, Godda and Pakur districts in Santhal Pargana Division M: municipality, CT: census town, R: rural/ urban centre, H: historical/ religious/ tourist centre Owing to space constraints in the small map, the actual locations in a larger map may vary slightly

 LOCATION
 Panchuara is located at 24.534667°N 87.504722°E﻿ / 24.534667; 87.504722 .
 Panchuara has an area of 1,325.16 hectares (3,274.5 acres).


 OVERVIEW
 The map shows a hilly area with the Rajmahal hills  running from the bank of the Ganges  in the extreme north to the south, beyond the area covered by the map into Dumka district. ‘Farakka’ is marked on the map and that is where Farakka Barrage  is, just inside West Bengal. Rajmahal coalfield  is shown in the map. The entire area is overwhelmingly rural with only small pockets of urbanisation.

 Note: The full screen map is interesting. All places marked on the map are linked and you can easily move on to another page of your choice. Enlarge the map to see what else is there – one gets railway links, many more road links and so on.

 DEMOGRAPHICS


 According to the 2011 Census of India , Panchuara had a total population of 2,958, of which 1,486 (50%) were males and 1,472 (50%) were females. Population in the age range 0–6 years was 609. The total number of literate persons in Panchuara was 2,349 (50.62% of the population over 6 years). 

 ECONOMY


 Panem Coal, a joint venture of Punjab State Power Corporation  and Eastern Minerals and Trading Agency (EMTA), operates the Pachhwara Central project. It is estimated that Pachhwara Central block has reserves of 562 million tonnes of coal. It is a part of the Rajmahal coalfield . An open cast mine  has been developed across 11 square kilometres (4.2 sq mi). It supplies coal to three power pants in Punjab. Jharkhand state government earns a royalty of around Rs. 100 crores annually. The operations have displaced 250 families. The project began in 2002 and ran into trouble when the Santhal community inhabiting the area were pushed off their land. Sister Valsa John, an Indian nun, organised the Santhals to demand compensation for their land for the project. Ultimately Panem Coal was forced into a compensation agreement. However, Sister Valsa was beaten and hacked to death by a mob in 2011.   
 For the previous era in Maryland football history, see Maryland Terrapins football: 1856–1946 .
 From 1947 to 1955, Jim Tatum  served as the head coach of the Maryland Terrapins football  team, which represented the University of Maryland  in National Collegiate Athletic Association  (NCAA) college football . Maryland hired Tatum to replace Clark Shaughnessy  after the 1946 season. Tatum had created both success and controversy during his one season as head coach of the Oklahoma Sooners football  team. During his nine-year tenure, Tatum became one of the most successful head football coaches in Maryland history, and the Terrapins compiled two national championships , three conference championships, and five bowl game  appearances. His teams compiled a 73–15–4 record without a single losing season, and as of the end of 2016, he has the highest winning percentage of any Maryland football coach who coached at least seven games.  In 1954, the University of Maryland appointed a new president, Dr. Wilson Elkins , who chose to de-emphasize football. Following the 1955 season, Tatum took a pay cut to coach at his alma mater, North Carolina , and he died four years later.


 Main article: Maryland Terrapins football 
 During Tatum's tenure, several Maryland players were awarded prestigious individual honors. Two Maryland quarterbacks  were runners-up for the Heisman Trophy , which is awarded to college football's most outstanding player. In 1952, Jack Scarbath  was a first runner-up to Oklahoma running back Billy Vessels .  In 1953, Bernie Faloney  was a third runner-up, with John Lattner  of Notre Dame  winning the award.  Dick Modzelewski won the 1952 Outland Trophy , the annual award given to the nation's most outstanding interior lineman .
 Seven Maryland players received first-team All-American  honors: Bernie Faloney, Stan Jones , Dick Modzelewski , Bob Pellegrini , Mike Sandusky , Jack Scarbath, and Bob Ward  (twice honored). Seven Maryland players received second-team All-American honors: Tom Cosgrove , Chet Hanulak , Ray Krouse , Dick Modzelewski, Ed Modzelewski , Ed Vereb , and Bill Walker  (twice honored). Also during this period, the Southern Conference  (through 1952) and Atlantic Coast Conference  (ACC) (since 1953) bestowed all-conference honors upon Maryland players twenty-seven times.
  In later years, two of these players were honored as part of the ACC's 50th Anniversary Team and five were inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame .




 TATUM BEFORE MARYLAND


 Jim Tatum was born in McColl, South Carolina  on July 22, 1913. He played football as a left tackle  like four of his older brothers. Tatum attended the University of North Carolina  where he played for Carl Snavely 's Tar Heels  and earned All-American  honors during his senior year in 1934 . The following season, he became Snavely's assistant coach and followed him to Cornell  in 1936. Tatum returned to North Carolina in 1940 as an assistant coach under Bear Wolf . In 1942, Tatum was promoted into the head coaching job himself and compiled a 5–2–2 record. The next year, during the Second World War, he enlisted in the United States Navy and served as an assistant coach for the Iowa Pre-Flight School  football team under Don Faurot , the inventor of the split-T . Future Oklahoma coach Bud Wilkinson  worked as an assistant coach alongside Tatum.

 In 1946, with the recommendation of Oklahoma athletic director Jap Haskell , Tatum was hired as the Sooners' head coach and brought Wilkinson as an assistant. Tatum replaced Dewey Luster , who resigned due to ill health.
  Luster had struggled in the position as the Second World War put a continuous and heavy drain on athletes at the University of Oklahoma .  The final game before Luster's resignation was a 0–47 loss at the hands of Oklahoma A&M , which rounded out Oklahoma's 1945 season with a 5–5 record.

 In Tatum's one season  at Oklahoma, he led the Sooners to an 8–3 finish and a share of the Big Six Conference  championship.  Tatum and his staff also recruited nine players who became All-Americans: Plato Andros , Buddy Burris , Jack Mitchell , Jim Owens , John Rapacz , Darrell Royal , George Thomas , Wade Walker , and Stan West . 
 In addition to his team's success on the gridiron, Tatum caused controversy. Buddy Burris, the first three-time All-American at Oklahoma, said, "Jim Tatum was a con-man, a dictator, a tyrant, and one hell of a football coach." Tatum greatly surpassed his allocated budget and linked players with sponsors who sometimes paid or bought clothes for their sponsored players. After a 34–13 Gator Bowl  victory over N.C. State , University of Oklahoma president George Cross  discovered that Tatum had paid the fifty Sooners players $120 each ($1,801, adjusted for inflation ). Cross had explicitly warned Tatum not to do so, as it was a violation of conference rules. With further investigation, it was discovered that $60,000 ($900,410 in inflation-adjusted terms) was unaccounted for in the athletic department budget, which resulted in the relief of athletic director Jap Haskell.

 Meanwhile, Tatum resigned to take the head coaching job at Maryland with a $12,000 salary, one-third more than he made at Oklahoma, ($157,270, adjusted for inflation). Oklahoma filled the open coaching job with Tatum's former assistant, Bud Wilkinson .


 THE 1947 SEASON

 See also: 1947 Maryland Terrapins football team
 Gambino , who had limited playing time under Shaughnessy , proved a star during the 1947 season.
 In Tatum's initial season at Maryland, his results were similar to those at Oklahoma. After compiling a 3–6 record the year prior, the Terrapins improved to 7–2–2 under Tatum. Whereas his predecessor Clark Shaughnessy  had pioneered the T-formation , Tatum installed the split-T  offense that his former colleague Don Farout had invented. The team's two losses came at the hands of two ranked period powerhouses, Duke and North Carolina.
  Maryland's star running back, Lu Gambino , scored three touchdowns against West Virginia  to lead the team to their first victory in the third meeting of the series .  The Terrapins' regular-season play earned them a berth in their first postseason game. 

 1948 GATOR BOWL
 Main article: 1948 Gator Bowl 
 Maryland met Georgia  in the 1948 Gator Bowl . The Terrapins scored first when Gambino broke a 35-yard run for a touchdown in the second quarter. On the first series of the second half, Georgia quarterback John Rauch  led an 87-yard drive capped by a one-yard dive into the end zone. Maryland responded with an 80-yard drive for another score by Gambino. Georgia turned the ball over with a fumble on its own 40-yard line and Maryland capitalized with a 24-yard touchdown pass to Gambino. In the final quarter, Georgia came from behind with a one-yard touchdown rush by Joe Geri  and a nine-yard touchdown pass to John Donaldson . Georgia missed the extra point and the final result was a 20–20 tie.
  Gambino recorded all three Maryland touchdowns and 165 rushing yards, which set a school bowl-game record that stood for 60 years until broken by Da'Rel Scott  in the 2008 Humanitarian Bowl .


 EFFECTS
 Gambino finished the year as the NCAA scoring leader with 96 points.  He was inducted into the Gator Bowl  Hall of Fame in 1992 for his achievement as the bowl game's "first superb running back."  Lu Gambino received All-Southern Conference honors.


 THE 1948 SEASON

 See also: 1948 Maryland Terrapins football team

 The 1948 season saw Maryland slide to a 6–4 record, but they delivered four shutouts  and lost two of their games by a combined three points. Two of their four losses came against ranked conference opponents, and a third was a 34-point shutout at the hands of Vanderbilt. Future two-time Heisman runner-up Charlie Justice  helped North Carolina to a 29-point romp over the Terrapins.




 THE 1949 SEASON

 See also: 1949 Maryland Terrapins football team

 Maryland improved to 9–1 in 1949 to earn their second bowl appearance. Their lone loss came against a ranked Michigan State team and Maryland allowed no opponent to score more than 14 points. They recorded victories over two ranked teams: Boston U.  and Missouri  under Tatum's former boss, Don Faurot.  Maryland finished the regular season with a final AP ranking of 14th.  The Terrapins again traveled to the Gator Bowl for their finale, and they defeated 20th-ranked Missouri.  Ray Krouse was named All-Southern Conference and an AP second-team All-American.



 THE 1950 SEASON

 See also: 1950 Maryland Terrapins football team
 Stadium  (pictured here with the upper deck, a modern addition) was completed in time for the 1950 season.
 The Terrapins started off as the 15th-ranked team in the preseason AP Poll .  At Georgia, Maryland lost its season-opener, 7–27.  Tatum said, "We weren't ready for Georgia in a game as early as September 23 ... We weren't in shape and the  heat killed us." The loss, however, did not affect Maryland's poll ranking as the situation surrounding the game was generally understood. 
 In Week 2, the Terrapins played the inaugural game at the newly completed Byrd Stadium . It was the first game against the Naval Academy  in 16 years. The series  had been canceled in 1934 after Maryland accused Navy of an illegal game-winning play. In 1950, Maryland agreed to fill a vacancy in the Navy schedule left open by a Georgetown cancellation.  The high-scoring game was the 12th meeting of the intense in-state rivalry and resulted in just the second-ever Maryland win.

 After upsetting second-ranked Michigan State , 34–7, Maryland climbed to an AP Poll ranking of eighth in the nation and then defeated Georgetown.  The following game they met N.C. State  at Byrd Stadium for Homecoming weekend. In the first quarter, a Maryland fumble rolled out of the end zone  for a safety , and soon after, another fumble set up a touchdown rush by NC State. Maryland advanced inside the N.C. State five-yard line three times but was unable to score. In the third quarter, NC State scored again to expand their lead, 0–16. Maryland scored on a 21-yard pass from Jack Scarbath  to Bob Shemonski . With three minutes remaining, Shemonski connected with a pass to Pete Augsburger for another touchdown. A 47-yard drive into Wolfpack territory ended with an interception in the end zone with seconds remaining. The loss effectively ended the Terrapins' hopes for a bowl game bid.  The second loss dropped them out of the AP Poll for the remainder of the year.

 Bob Ward  was named a first-team All-American.  Ward and Elmer Wingate  were named All-Southern Conference.


 THE 1951 SEASON

 See also: 1951 Maryland Terrapins football team
 Jack Scarbath  helped engineer Maryland's undefeated 1951 season.
 Over the course of the season, Maryland outscored its opponents 381–74, accumulated three shutout wins, and held seven opponents to 7 points or less. It was Maryland's first 10-win season and remains the team's only perfect undefeated season in the modern era.


 Maryland entered the season at number-16 on the AP and Coaches' polls, and remained ranked for the duration. A 40-point trouncing of conference foe George Washington  in the season-opener propelled the Terrapins to a number-nine ranking in both polls.
  Other wins included games against Southeastern Conference  powerhouses: a romp over Georgia and a shutout against LSU . Before the Georgia game, Tatum showed his team that Georgia had charged only $5 for tickets, instead of the usual $7.50 ($56 instead of $85, adjusted for inflation). Tatum said, "They don't think very much of you, do they?"

 The Terrapins finished the regular season with a 9–0 record and the Southern Conference championship. They achieved a final ranking as the number-three team in the nation.  They secured a berth in the Sugar Bowl  to face the number-one team in the nation, undefeated Tennessee  led by head coach "General" Robert Neyland .



 1952 SUGAR BOWL
 Main article: 1952 Sugar Bowl 
 The Washington Post  called the 1952 Sugar Bowl  the second "game of the century ", with the first  having been between the undefeated Army  and Notre Dame  teams in 1946. Maryland was viewed as an underdog  against Tennessee, which included five All-Americans on its roster.  The Volunteers were led by Heisman runner-up quarterback Hank Lauricella ,
  and Neyland's offensive linemen were described as not large but "squatty" and "bruiser, not flashy, but slightly murderous." Neyland considered the split-T offense used by Tatum gimmicky and relied on the more traditional single-wing formation .  For the game, Tatum himself abandoned the split-T in favor of a smashmouth  strategy, which he hoped would catch Tennessee off-guard. Neyland's strategy focused heavily on punting the ball to pin the opponent in their own territory with a goal of creating turnovers, and Tatum likewise adopted it.

 The game started with both teams exchanging several punts in the first quarter. Maryland gained good field position after Lauricella kicked a short punt. Running backs Ed Modzelewski  and Ed Fullerton  then led an 11-play, 56-yard rushing drive for a touchdown. On the kickoff, Bob Ward hit Lauricella and forced a fumble that Maryland recovered on Tennessee's 13-yard line.  After four plays, Jack Scarbath  pitched  to Fullerton who then threw a six-yard forward pass  to Bob Shemonski in the end zone and expanded the Maryland lead to 14–0. Scarbath then engineered a 48-yard drive and ran it in himself  for the Terrapins' third touchdown within seven minutes.  Late in the second quarter, Tennessee back Bert Rechichar  caught a four-yard pass for a touchdown, but the extra point  was no good. At the end of the first half, Maryland had stunned Tennessee by gaining a 21–6 lead.  In the fourth quarter, Fullerton intercepted  a pass and returned it 46 yards for a touchdown.  In the final minutes, Tennessee's goal-line quarterback Herky Payne ran it in from the one-yard line. Maryland won the game with a final result of 28–13.


 EFFECTS
 players celebrate their victory over No. 1 Tennessee.
 With the final polls already closed before the bowl season, Tennessee retained possession of the national championship. In following years, however, several selectors have named Maryland as the retroactive 1951 national champions: Jeff Sagarin , the College Football Researchers Association, DeVold System, Dunkel System, and National Championship Foundation.


 AWARDS
 Jim Tatum was named the Southern Conference Coach of the Year. Bob Ward received the Knute Rockne Award and was named the Southern Conference Player of the Year. Bob Ward was named a consensus first-team All-American and Dick Modzelewski  and Ed Modzelewski were named second-team All-Americans.  Ward and Ed Modzelewski were named All-Southern Conference.


 THE 1952 SEASON

 See also: 1952 Maryland Terrapins football team
 routed No. 20 Navy, 38–7, in 1952.
 Maryland was sanctioned for violating a Southern Conference  rule, passed halfway through the 1951 season, that banned postseason play. The punishment, for participating in the Sugar Bowl, disallowed the Terrapins from playing any conference games during the 1952 season.  This compelled Maryland to schedule all but three games on the road.

 The AP preseason poll ranked Maryland second in the nation.  The Terrapins recorded a 37-point shutout of 19th-ranked Georgia and defeated 20th-ranked Navy, 38–7. Maryland finished the season with a No. 13 final ranking.  Their loss at Mississippi  ended a 22-game winning streak for the Terrapins.  Tatum blamed the Terrapins' late season slide to injuries suffered by star quarterback Scarbath and weariness from the grueling road schedule.


 EFFECTS
 After the season, disaffection within the Southern Conference prompted seven former members, including Maryland, to form the Atlantic Coast Conference  (ACC). The schism was due in part to the ban on bowl participation, and the vast geographic dispersion of and disparity between the sizes of member schools. Clemson, another founding ACC member, had likewise been forced to play outside the Southern Conference in 1952.

 Tatum considered resigning in order to enter business. University president Byrd, a staunch patron of football at the school, was preparing to campaign for governor , and Tatum feared his successor would significantly reduce the number of athletic scholarships available. He and Byrd, however, had also disagreed over the decision to participate in bowl games in violation of conference rules. Tatum was opposed to it, as it greatly increased the difficulty of scheduling and had caused the reduction in number of home games. 

 AWARDS
 In 1952, Maryland quarterback Jack Scarbath  was runner-up for the Heisman Trophy , which is awarded to college football's most outstanding player. Scarbath received 367 points, coming behind to Oklahoma running back Billy Vessels , who received 525 points.  Scarbath also was named the Southern Conference Player of the Year. Dick Modzelewski was awarded the Outland Trophy and the Knute Rockne Award. Scarbath and Dick Modzelewski were also both named consensus first-team All-Americans. Tom Cosgrove  was named a second-team All-American. Stan Jones  and Scarbath were named All-Southern Conference.
  The Associated Press All-South team, which consisted of players from fifteen schools in the Southern U.S. , included Scarbath, and honorable mentions end John Alderton, tackle Dick Modzelewski, and back Ed Fullerton. 

 THE 1953 SEASON

 See also: 1953 Maryland Terrapins football team

 During this season, Maryland outscored its opponents 298–38, accumulated six shutout wins, and allowed only one team, Georgia , to score more than 7 points.  No ACC team scored more total points until 1967 and none has ever allowed fewer points in the regular season (31). Maryland ranked first nationally in terms of rushing defense (83.9 yards allowed per game) and scoring defense (3.1 points allowed per game).  At the end of the regular season, the three wire services, the Associated Press , International News Service , and United Press , each named Maryland as the national championship team.

 Maryland entered the season ranked ninth in the preseason AP Poll.  In the season opener against Missouri , Chet Hanulak  scored in the first two minutes of play on a 61-yard run. Maryland intercepted four passes while sacrificing three fumbles in the 20–7 win. 
 Against Washington and Lee , Hanulak made an interception and then on Maryland's possession rushed for a 12-yard touchdown. Ron Waller  dropped a Generals' punt at mid-field, but recovered and returned it for a touchdown. After halftime, Tatum fielded third- and fourth-string players before the final results of 52–0.

 At Clemson, quarterback Bernie Faloney  returned the opening kick off 88 yards for a touchdown. In the second quarter, Clemson quarterback Don King was sacked by several Maryland defenders and suffered a game-ending knee injury. With 45 seconds left in the half, Dick Nolan  scored on a 90-yard punt return. In the second half, Faloney connected with Nolan for a 65-yard touchdown pass. Clemson finished the game with two pass completions and suffered its first shutout at home in 11 years, 20–0.

 Against Georgia, most critics thought Maryland faced its first true test. In the first quarter, the Terrapins took a quick 14–0 lead and held the Bulldogs to six offensive plays, two of which were punts. In the second quarter, Georgia quarterback Zeke Bratkowski  led his team to two consecutive touchdown drives, and the score was 21–13 in favor of Maryland at halftime. Two minutes into the third quarter, Faloney intercepted a Bratkowski pass and returned it for a touchdown. Bratkowski was taken out of the game after numerous sacks by Stan Jones  and Bob Morgan . The 40–13 final result would be the most points the Terrapins allowed during the entire season.

 At North Carolina , the undefeated Terrapins met the undefeated Tar Heels. Two 15-yard penalties against North Carolina set up a quarterback sneak by Faloney for a touchdown. In the second quarter, Bill Walker  caught a pitch at the Maryland 35 and ran it 49 yards to the North Carolina 16-yard line. From there, Charlie Boxold scored another touchdown for the Terrapins. In the third quarter, Hanulak took a pitch and took it 34 yards into the end zone. The 26–0 win was the Maryland's first in Chapel Hill, North Carolina  since 1924. Tatum later called it "the greatest win of any team I ever coached, including the  Sugar Bowl [over national champion Tennessee]."

 At Miami, Hanulak scored first on a two-yard rush. Morgan recovered a Miami fumble and on the ensuing possession Faloney scored on an eight-yard rush. By halftime, Maryland led 27–0. Tatum disallowed any passes or trick plays in the second half, and the final result was 30–0.

 Maryland next traveled to South Carolina  to face a team coming off of a four-game winning streak. Ralph Felton  scored first to cap a long drive with a short rush. In the next series, the Gamecocks punted it away and the ball was returned by Hanulak 35 yards for a touchdown. In the second quarter, South Carolina recovered a Maryland fumble on the Terrapins' 14-yard line. In three plays, Maryland had pushed them back to the 32-yard line before South Carolina finally scored. With South Carolina held to 37 rushing yards the final result was 24–6.

 After defeating George Washington  27–6, the Terrapins went on to shut out two ranked teams: 11th-ranked Mississippi  and 11th-ranked Alabama . Maryland secured a share of the ACC championship  alongside Duke  and a berth in the Orange Bowl  as the only undefeated and untied team in the nation.  Maryland finished the regular season 10–0 and were crowned the national champions.

 1954 ORANGE BOWL
 In Miami, first-ranked Maryland faced the team Tatum had coached prior to his arrival at College Park: fourth-ranked Oklahoma  under former assistant Bud Wilkinson. The Sooners handed Maryland their only defeat, 0–7, but—as had happened in 1951 to the Terrapins' detriment—the final rankings were released before the bowls, and for the third time in four years, AP's national champion was defeated in their postseason game. However, unlike Tennessee, who retained their top-rank despite losing to Maryland in 1951, the Terrapins (10–1–0) did indeed finish with the best record, better than the Orange Bowl victor, Oklahoma (9–1–1).
  Maryland ranked first nationally in terms of rushing defense (83.9 yards allowed per game) and scoring defense (3.1 points allowed per game). At the same time, the Terps scored a record combined total of 298 points, a number not exceeded until 1967. 

 AWARDS
 Like the year prior, in 1953, a Maryland quarterback, Bernie Faloney, was in contention for the Heisman Trophy. Faloney finished fourth in the running and received 258 points, behind Notre Dame's John Lattner  (1,850), Minnesota's Paul Giel  (1,794), and UCLA's Paul Cameron (444).  Stan Jones was selected as a consensus first-team All-American. Bernie Faloney was also named a first-team All-American. Chet Hanulak was named a second-team All-American. Four Terrapins were named to the All-ACC first-team: John Bowersox, Bernie Faloney, Chester Hanulak, and Stan Jones. Three were named to the All-ACC second-team: Ralph Felton, Bob Morgan, and Bill Walker.


 THE 1954 SEASON

 See also: 1954 Maryland Terrapins football team

 On Thanksgiving Day, Tatum coached Maryland to a pummeling, 74–13, of his former boss Don Faurot's Missouri,  and the Terrapins set an ACC record-high for scoring that stood for 27 years.  Maryland finished the season with a 7–2–1 record and was named the eighth-ranked team by AP.  Bill Walker was selected by AP as a second-team All-American. Three Maryland players were named to the All-ACC first team: Dick Bielski , Bill Walker, and Ronnie Waller . Two were named to the All-ACC second team: John Irvine and Bob Pellegrini .


 THE 1955 SEASON

 See also: 1955 Maryland Terrapins football team

 In Tatum's final season in College Park, Maryland spent four weeks as the first-ranked team in the AP Poll and ten weeks ranked in the top three.  No opponent managed more than 13 points during the regular season. Maryland again had the first-ranked rushing defense in the nation, allowing 83.9 yards per game.  Frank Tamburello became the starting quarterback, and entered the season with significant game experience from the prior year as a reserve behind Charlie Boxold. Fullback Tom Selep missed the season due to a knee injury.

 The opener against Missouri  was a much closer contest than the previous year's record-setting game. Ed Vereb  rushed for a 14-yard touchdown and Tamburello passed for another, but only failed extra-point attempts by Missouri in the second half preserved victory, 13–12.

 In week two, Maryland met first-ranked UCLA  for the second half of a home-and-home series in a game dubbed "The Best of the East vs. the Best of the West."  It was a rain-soaked defensive contest at Byrd Stadium, where Maryland held UCLA's rushing attack to −21 yards. UCLA quarterback Ronnie Knox  completed 10 of 15 passes for 100 yards but also threw two interceptions.  Late in the first quarter, Knox's passing brought the Bruins to the Maryland three-yard line.  On the next play, UCLA advanced to the one-foot line before Bob Pellegrini tackled second-string fullback Doug Peters to force a fumble. Maryland made the only score when, in the third quarter, quarterback Frank Tamburello executed an option run  and pitched to halfback Ed Vereb, who ran it 15 yards into the end zone.
  With the victory, the Terrapins became the first-ranked team.

 The following week, Maryland beat 20th-ranked Baylor , 20–6,  with Tamburello passing for two touchdowns.  Maryland then defeated Wake Forest , 28–7, and held them to nine rushing yards.  Against North Carolina , they allowed 18 yards on the ground. Vereb scored three touchdowns and made an interception, but the Tar Heels scored under unusual circumstances when center Jim Jones stripped Tamburello and returned it 35 yards. The final result was 25–7.

 Syracuse  scored the most points of any regular season opponent with touchdowns by Jim Brown  and Don Althouse, but Maryland's offense scored a season high and won, 34–13. The Terrapins shutout a mediocre South Carolina , 27–0, and Louisiana State , 13–0, against whom they made four interceptions including one in the end zone by Phil Perlo . Clemson  took the lead early with a Don King touchdown pass to Dalton Rivers and Joel Wells  breaking away for another score soon after. Maryland's reserve quarterback, Lynn Beightol, threw to Ed Vereb for two touchdowns, and in the second half, Clemson was allowed only 22 yards. Maryland won, 25–12. Maryland posted a fourth shutout against George Washington , 19–0. Vereb scored two touchdowns, which tied Lu Gambino 's single-season school record of 16.

 The Terrapins, with a perfect ACC record, were named conference co-champions alongside Duke  for the second consecutive year. Maryland possessed a perfect regular season record and ranked third in the nation behind Michigan State  (8–1). The Terps secured an Orange Bowl rematch against first-ranked Oklahoma  and a chance to avenge their defeat in 1953. However, the Sooners beat them again, 20–6, and they finished the postseason with a 10–1 record.


 AWARDS
 Bob Pellegrini was named a consensus first-team All-American, the National Lineman of the Year, and the ACC Player of the Year.
  Mike Sandusky  was also named a first-team All-American. Ed Vereb  and Bill Walker were named second-team All-Americans. Four Maryland players were named to the All-ACC first-team: Jack Davis , Bob Pellegrini, Mike Sandusky, and Ed Vereb. Three were named to the All-ACC second-team: Russell Dennis, Frank Tamburello, and Bill Walker.


 TATUM'S DEPARTURE

 C. "Curley" Byrd  served as Maryland president during most of Tatum's tenure.
 In 1954, Curley Byrd  resigned as university president in order to enter state politics, and was replaced by Dr. Wilson Elkins , a Rhodes scholar  and former Texas  quarterback. Elkins worked to improve academic standards at the school, which had been criticized for overemphasizing football. One year during Tatum's tenure, the school awarded 93 football scholarships  averaging $944 each ($10,287 adjusted for inflation ). The Diamondback  student newspaper said that, while Tatum was at Maryland, it "was an era in which an inadequate stadium became ultra-adequate, and an inadequate library became more inadequate."

 During his tenure at Maryland, Tatum became one of the most successful head football coaches in school history. In nine seasons, he led the Terrapins to two national championships , three conference championships, and five bowl game  appearances. His teams compiled a 73–15–4 record without a single losing season. To date, he remains the winningest Maryland football coach of the modern era with a winning percentage  of 0.819.

 After the 1955 season, Tatum took an 18% pay cut, from $18,500 to $15,000 (from $202,098 to $163,863 in inflation-adjusted terms), to return to North Carolina  as head coach. There, The Daily Tar Heel  student newspaper was displeased to see Tatum arrive and called him a "parasitic monster of open professionalism."  After a few years, however, he was accepted by the student body, the faculty, and alumni.  Tatum had said, "I'm going back to North Carolina to die,"  and the statement proved prescient. Just four years later, in 1959, he died of Rocky Mountain spotted fever  at the age of 46.


 SEE ALSO

     

 FOOTNOTES

  1.           This usage of "modern era" is used to differentiate from Maryland's only     other perfect season in 1893     .  2.           At the time, both the AP Poll and Coaches' Poll published their final     rankings, and declared the national champions, before the postseason bowl     games.
 For other people named Matt Willis, see Matt Willis (disambiguation) .
 Mathew James Willis (born 8 May 1983), previously known as Matty Jay, is an English musician, singer, songwriter, television personality and actor. He is known as co-founder, bassist and co-vocalist of the pop-punk  band Busted . Willis released his debut solo album Don't Let It Go to Waste  on 20 November 2006. It contains three top-20 singles. 




 In December 2006, Willis won the sixth series  of the ITV  reality series I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! . He co-presented the ITV2  spin-off show  with his wife Emma  in 2007 and 2008. In 2014 Willis played the role of Garth Stubbs in the revived ITV  sitcom Birds of a Feather  and Luke Riley  in the BBC One  soap opera EastEnders .

 EARLY LIFE


 Willis was born in Tooting  in London on 8 May 1983. He has an older brother, but their parents separated when he was only three years old. His mother later remarried and had his half-sister.
 Willis had three different last names legally while growing up. His original last name was Willis, after his father; this was changed to Woods after his parents split, and later it changed to Sargent after his mother remarried.
 Willis has noted he was a "problem" child, regularly sneaking out of the house by climbing down drain pipes. He also as a child suffered from tunnel vision , asthma  and hyperactivity  problems. Willis attended Woking High School   after being asked to leave his previous secondary school, before leaving to attend the independent fee-paying Sylvia Young Theatre School  in Marylebone , London, where he met his now friends Lee Ryan , Tom Fletcher , Billie Piper , Jodi Albert  and the late Amy Winehouse . 

 CAREER



 MUSIC CAREER
 BUSTED
 Willis first found fame in the music industry as one third of the pop  band Busted . The band's bassist and vocalist, Willis formed the band as well as co-writing almost all of their songs along with Charlie Simpson , James Bourne  and Tom Fletcher , although the latter was a member of McFly . During their career, the trio became successful in the UK and began an upsurge of pop popularity. They had several chart successes and released two studio albums, one live album and a compilation of their greatest hits, available in the U.S.. The band disbanded in 2005 when Simpson left to pursue other projects . 
 On 10 November 2015, Busted announced on their official website and social media that they would reform with a 13-date starting in 2016. Due to demand more dates were subsequently added. Busted released their third studio album, Night Driver , on 25 November 2016.  It was then followed in 2019 by Half Way There . In the latter end of that year, Busted began their first hiatus since the split to give space for the members to pursue other projects.
 SOLO CAREER
 After a brief stint in rehab after Busted split, Matt launched a solo career on Mercury Records , releasing singles in 2005 and 2006, "Up All Night ", "Hey Kid ", "Don't Let It Go to Waste ", and a cover version of The Primitives  song, "Crash " for the film Mr Bean's Holiday . Just as he was about to depart on his first solo UK Tour with support band The Riverclub, he sacked his agents of six years, 'Prestige Management'. Willis was later dropped by Mercury.

 MCBUSTED
 performing with McBusted at British Summer Time (Hyde Park, 2014)
 Willis' return to music saw him reunite with one of his ex-Busted bandmates (James Bourne) and with McFly  to form the group, McBusted. After a successful tour, they released their debut album McBusted .  On 10 November 2015, it was announced that Simpson had decided to rejoin Busted after 10 years away from the band, as a consequence Willis confirmed that McBusted had parted ways for the time being putting the band on hiatus.

 TELEVISION
 In 2006, Willis took part in the sixth series of Celebrity MasterChef . In December 2006 on ITV , Willis was crowned 'King of the Jungle' on I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!  despite going into the final day as the 8-1 underdog  against Myleene Klass  and Jason Donovan .  Weighing 13 stone 2 lb upon entering, he discovered that he had lost two stone after being weighed again in the jungle. In order to enter the jungle, Willis was required to sky dive from a plane. During his stay, in a compulsory bushtucker  trial, Willis ate a kangaroo  anus , crocodile  penis , crocodile eye, witchetty grub , and some sweeties and mealworms  to earn a cooked, luxury meal for himself and the other celebrities. In November 2007, Willis and his then-girlfriend Emma Griffths  went to Australia and presented I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! NOW!  on ITV2 , after Willis had won the 2006 series. Following in 2008, the couple were asked back after winning a presenting award earlier that year. Each series lasted over six weeks in Australia during November and December. In early 2009, Willis and his wife did not renew their contract with ITV2  due to the birth of their first child in June 2009. In November 2011, Willis appeared on Big Brother's Bit on the Side  with his wife.]
 Since winning I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!, Willis has also pursued various presenting projects. On 14 February 2007, Willis presented ITV2 's coverage of the BRIT Awards  with Lauren Laverne , Russell Howard  and Alesha Dixon  and returned to this role in 2008 alongside his wife, Emma, and Laverne. He interviewed Rihanna , Shayne Ward , Adele , Ozzy Osbourne , Kate Nash  and many more including Perez Hilton  who became very fond of Willis. Following his success in this, he hosted the MTV Hits  night of MTV's Spanking New Music Tour 2007 with his wife Emma, live from the Anson Rooms in Bristol  on 21 March 2007. In February 2008, Willis presented the Red Carpet coverage for the E! Entertainment  network, at the 2008 BAFTA Awards , alongside his wife and Ryan Seacrest . 
 In January 2014, Willis played Garth Stubbs in the revival of Birds of a Feather  on ITV, but did not return for the second series due to McBusted commitments and was replaced by Samuel James. In February 2014, Willis appeared in the short-term role of Luke Riley  in EastEnders , the boyfriend of returning character Stacey Branning  (Lacey Turner ).

 In 2022, announcements stated Willis would host a documentary concerning his experiences with addiction .  The documentary, Matt Willis: Fighting Addiction, aired on 17 May 2023. Willis was praised for his honesty.   To promote the film, Willis appeared on The One Show , where he opined: "There's some incredible science behind addiction but I learnt a lot through hearing other people's stories which resonated with me  I've always been quite open and honest with [my children] but  watched it together and she had the most incredible questions. I was blown away by her reaction to it."  Matt Willis: Fighting Addiction garnered two million viewers. 

 THEATRE WORK
 In 2010, Willis made his theatrical debut as Nick in Flashdance: The Musical , a West-End production. Later that year, Willis was offered the role of Chuck in an adaption of Footloose .  Late 2011 also saw Willis take on the role of Fiyero  in Wicked .  He continued the role until 27 October 2012, when he was replaced by Ben Freeman . In August and September 2018, he starred as Orin Scrivello in Little Shop of Horrors  in Regent's Park Open Air Theatre .  In 2021 it was announced Willis would be joining the UK tour of Waitress  playing Dr Pomatter. 

 PODCAST
 Willis is the co-host of comedy  podcast  When No One Is Watching alongside comedian Matt Richardson . A range of celebrity guests are featured on the podcast, during which they are asked to admit 'the darkest pleasures and weirdest confessions they would rather no one knew about'. 

 In 2023, Willis began his own podcast 'On The Mend' in which he interviews guests who 'have hit rock bottom  and made it through to the other side'.   Guests included Raphael Rowe , Dougie Poynter  and Bryony Gordon .

 PERSONAL LIFE

 in 2006
 In April 2005, aged 21, Willis stayed for three weeks at London's Priory Hospital  for the treatment of alcoholism . In July 2006, aged 23, he was admitted again for a few days for drug abuse , because he was addicted to cannabis  from the age of 13. He began to have problems from the drug-taking including physiological  and memory problems. In June 2008, aged 25, Willis entered a rehab centre in Bournemouth  after a marriage ultimatum, as Willis continued to use drugs and abuse alcohol . It was reported that a night out with close friend Amy Winehouse  pushed Willis too far.   Willis took the full five week course in drugs and alcohol. In November 2007, Willis claimed to have stopped smoking , which he had done from the age of 11, but has since resumed smoking. 
 Shortly after completing rehab, Willis was recruited to the Church of Scientology  but later left the Church after they reportedly advised that he separate from his then-partner of three years, Emma Griffiths , whom the Church deemed to be a "suppressive person ". 
 On 5 July 2008, Willis married Griffiths at Rushton Hall , Northamptonshire . The couple have three children – two daughters born in 2009 and 2016,    and a son in November 2011. 
 On 28 February 2010, Willis was injured in a skiing accident.

 During the COVID-19 pandemic  in 2021, Willis and his wife completed training with St John Ambulance  to act as vaccination volunteers. 

 DISCOGRAPHY



 STUDIO ALBUMS

 Singles


 FILMOGRAPHY



 FILM/TELEVISION



 THEATRE



 Itä-Savo is a Finnish language  daily newspaper published in Savonlinna , Finland . It has been in circulation since 1907.





 HISTORY AND PROFILE


 The paper was established in 1907 under the title of Savolainen and was a media outlet of the Old Finns Party.  It was renamed as Itä-Savo following the Independence of Finland  in 1917. 
 Itä-Savo was one of the papers owned by the Agrarian Party  in the 1950s.  Since 2002 the paper has no political affiliation.

 As of 2007 the publisher of Itä-Savo was a company with the same name which was part of the Länsi-Savo Corporation.  Its publisher is Etelä-Savon Viestintä Oy, a subsidiary of Länsi-Savo Corporation, and it has its headquarters in Savonlinna.  The paper is published in Berliner format . 
 Kyösti Pienimäki was the editor-in-chief of Itä-Savo in 2007.  Tuomo Yli-Huttula served in the post until October 2012 when Tiina Ojutkangas succeeded him as editor-in-chief of the paper.


 CIRCULATION


 Itä-Savo sold 10,094 copies in 1957.  Its circulation was 18,143 copies, and it had nearly 49,000 readers in 2007.  The paper had a circulation of 14,834 copies in 2013.  The number of its readers was 35,000 in 2014. 

 During the 2003–04 English football season, Portsmouth F.C.  competed in the Premier League . It was their first ever season in the Premiership and the first in English football's top flight since the 1987–88  season.





 SEASON SUMMARY


 Portsmouth's Premiership debut (and only their second top division campaign during the last 45 years) was a fine one, as they finished 13th and established Fratton Park  as one of the hardest Premiership grounds to get a result at. Only their dismal away form (with only two away wins all season) prevented them from finishing even higher and challenging for a European place, but it was still a very good season for the only newly promoted side to preserve their Premiership status.
 After a good start to the season which saw Portsmouth top of the Premiership after three games, the team slumped into the relegation zone, but rallied and only lost one of their last ten matches to finish 13th – ahead of more established sides like Everton, Manchester City, Blackburn Rovers and Tottenham Hotspur. To their credit, they were one of the only two teams to remain unbeaten against Arsenal's "Invincibles" in the league during the season.

 FINAL LEAGUE TABLE

 Main article: 2003–04 FA Premier League 
 Source: Premier League  Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored. Notes:  1.     Middlesbrough qualified as the 2003–04 Football League Cup      winners .

 KIT


 Portsmouth introduced a new kit for the season, still manufactured under the club's own brand, Pompey Sport. ty  remained the kit sponsors.

 PLAYERS



 FIRST-TEAM SQUAD
 Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.



 LEFT CLUB DURING SEASON
 Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.



 RESERVE SQUAD
 The following players did not appear for the first-team this season.
 Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.



 TRANSFERS



 IN
        Patrik Berger  – England       Liverpool , free, 6 June 2003            Dejan Stefanović  – Netherlands       Vitesse Arnhem , £1,850,000, 20 June 2003            Boris Živković  – Germany       Bayer Leverkusen , free, 24 June 2003            Teddy Sheringham , England       Tottenham Hotspur , free, 30 June 2003            Harald Wapenaar  – Netherlands       Utrecht , 8 July 2003            Amdy Faye  – France       Auxerre , undisclosed (estimated £1,500,000), 5 August 2003            Sébastien Schemmel  – England       West Ham United , undisclosed, 14 August 2003            Alexey Smertin  – England       Chelsea , season loan, 27 August 2003            Jason Roberts  – England       West Bromwich Albion , loan, 1 September 2003            Pavel Srníček  – Italy       Brescia , free, 1 September 2003            Eyal Berkovic  – England       Manchester City , £500,000, 8 January 2004            Richard Duffy  – Wales       Swansea City , undisclosed (six-figure sum), 26    January 2004,         Sebastian Olszar  – Austria       Admira Wacker Mödling , free, 26 January 2004            Ivica Mornar  – Belgium       Anderlecht , £400,000, 29 January 2004        Lomana Tresor LuaLua  – England       Newcastle United , three-month loan, £100,000 loan    fee, 2 February 2004         John Curtis  – England       Leicester City , free, 2 February 2004            Vincent Péricard  – Italy       Juventus , July 2003        Petri Pasanen  – Netherlands       Ajax Amsterdam , 2004        Alan Knight  – free

 OUT
        Justin Edinburgh  – released (later joined England       Billericay Town ), 2003        Jason Crowe  – released (later joined England       Grimsby Town ), 20 May 2003            Luke Nightingale  – released (later joined England       Southend United ), 20 May 2003        Carl Tiler  – retired, 20 May 2003        Gianluca Festa  – Italy       Cagliari , 13 June 2003            Paul Merson  – England       Walsall , undisclosed, 18 July 2003            Rowan Vine  – England       Colchester United , season loan, 7 August 2003            Yoshi Kawaguchi  – Denmark       FC Nordsjælland , 3 September 2003            Carl Robinson  – England       Rotherham United , month loan, 18 September 2003            Boris Živković  – Germany       Stuttgart , free, 13 January 2004            Jason Roberts  – England       West Bromwich Albion , loan ended, 14 January    2004         Jamie Vincent  – England       Derby County , free, 16 January 2004            Neil Barrett  – Scotland       Dundee , loan, 23 January 2004            Carl Robinson  – England       Sheffield United , loan, 30 January 2004            Pavel Srníček  – England       West Ham United , month loan, 19 February 2004            Lee Bradbury  – England       Walsall , free, 25 March 2004            Lewis Buxton  – England       AFC Bournemouth , season loan, October 2003        Courtney Pitt  – England       Coventry City , loan        Courtney Pitt  – England       Luton Town , loan        Lassina Diabaté  – France       AC Ajaccio 

 RESULTS



 PREMIER LEAGUE

 RESULTS PER MATCHDAY


 Source: WorldFootball.com  A = Away; H = Home; W = Win; D = Draw; L = Loss Portsmouth  v Aston Villa 
 16 August 2003 1 Portsmouth  2–1 Aston Villa  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Sheringham 
 41' Berger 
 62' Report  Barry

 82' (pen. ) Red card  87' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,101 Referee: Graham Barber 
 Manchester City  v Portsmouth 
 23 August 2003 2 Manchester City  1–1 Portsmouth  Manchester  Sommeil 
 90' Report  Yakubu 
 24' Stadium: City of Manchester Stadium  Attendance: 46,287 Referee: Matt Messias 
 Portsmouth  v Bolton Wanderers 
 26 August 2003 3 Portsmouth  4–0 Bolton Wanderers  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Sheringham 
 57', 88', 90' Stone 
 47' Report  Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,113 Referee: Dermot Gallagher 
 Wolverhampton Wanderers  v Portsmouth

 30 August 2003 4 Wolverhampton Wanderers  0–0 Portsmouth  Wolverhampton , West Midlands  Report  Stadium: Molineux  Attendance: 28,860 Referee: Andy D'Urso 
 Arsenal  v Portsmouth 
 13 September 2003 5 Arsenal  1–1 Portsmouth  Islington , London  Henry

 37' (pen. ) Report  Sheringham

 26' Stadium: Highbury  Attendance: 38,052 Referee: Alan Wiley 
 Portsmouth  v Blackburn Rovers 
 20 September 2003 6 Portsmouth  1–2 Blackburn Rovers  Portsmouth , Hampshire  De Zeeuw 
 57' Report  Neill

 35' Cole 
 43' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,024 Referee: Paul Durkin 
 Birmingham City  v Portsmouth 
 27 September 2003 7 Birmingham City  2–0 Portsmouth  Birmingham , West Midlands  Clemence 
 21' Lazardis
 50' Report  Stadium: St Andrew's  Attendance: 29,057 Referee: Steve Bennett 
 Portsmouth  v Charlton Athletic 
 4 October 2003 8 Portsmouth  1–2 Charlton Athletic  Portsmouth , Hampshire 15:00 BST Sheringham 
 34' Report  Fortune 
 77' Bartlett 
 90' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,106 Referee: Graham Poll 
 Portsmouth  v Liverpool 
 18 October 2003 9 Portsmouth  1–0 Liverpool  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Berger

 4' Report  Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,123 Referee: Steve Dunn 
 Newcastle United  v Portsmouth 
 25 October 2003 10 Newcastle United  3–0 Portsmouth  Newcastle upon Tyne , Tyneside  Speed 
 17' Shearer 
 28' (pen. ) Ameobi 
 61' Report  Stadium: St. James' Park  Attendance: 52,161 Referee: Paul Durkin 
 Manchester United  v Portsmouth 
 1 November 2003 11 Manchester United  3–0 Portsmouth  Trafford , Greater Manchester  Forlán 
 37' Ronaldo 
 79' Keane 
 82' Report  Stadium: Old Trafford  Attendance: 67,639 Referee: Neale Barry 
 Portsmouth  v Leeds United 
 8 November 2003 12 Portsmouth  6–1 Leeds United  Portsmouth , Hampshire 15:30 GMT Stefanović 
 16' O'Neil 
 45', 71' Foxe 
 62' Berger 
 75' Yakubu 
 86' Report  Smith

 18' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,112 Referee: Chris Foy 
 Fulham  v Portsmouth 
 24 November 2003 13 Fulham  2–0 Portsmouth  Fulham , London  Saha

 30', 33' Report  Berger  Red card  82' Stadium: Loftus Road  Attendance: 15,624 Referee: Alan Wiley 
 Portsmouth  v Leicester City 
 29 November 2003 14 Portsmouth  0–2 Leicester City  Portsmouth , Hampshire 15:00 Report  Ferdinand

 31' Bent 
 33' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,061 Referee: Mike Dean 
 Middlesbrough  v Portsmouth 
 6 December 2003 15 Middlesbrough  0–0 Portsmouth  Middlesbrough , North Yorkshire 15:00 Report  Stadium: Riverside Stadium  Attendance: 28,031 Referee: Steve Bennett 
 Portsmouth  v Everton 
 13 December 2003 16 Portsmouth  1–2 Everton  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Roberts

 15' Report  Carsley 
 27' Rooney 
 42' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,101 Referee: Uriah Rennie 
 Southampton  v Portsmouth 
 21 December 2003 17  Southampton  3–0 Portsmouth  Southampton , Hampshire  Dodd 
 34' Pahars 
 67' Beattie 
 90' Report  Stadium: St Mary's Stadium  Attendance: 31,697 Referee: Jeff Winter 
 Portsmouth  v Tottenham Hotspur 
 26 December 2003 18 Portsmouth  2–0 Tottenham Hotspur  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Berger 
 52', 68' Report  Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,078 Referee: Steve Dunn 
 Chelsea  v Portsmouth 
 28 December 2003 19 Chelsea  3–0 Portsmouth  Fulham , London  Bridge

 65' Lampard 
 73' Geremi 
 82' Report  Stadium: Stamford Bridge  Attendance: 41,552 Referee: Graham Barber 
 Aston Villa  v Portsmouth 
 6 January 2004 20 Aston Villa  2–1 Portsmouth  Birmingham , West Midlands  Ángel 
 22' Vassell 
 83' Report  Yakubu 
 49' Stadium: Villa Park  Attendance: 28,625 Referee: Jeff Winter 
 Portsmouth  v Manchester City 
 10 January 2004 21 Portsmouth  4–2 Manchester City  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Sheringham 
 58' Stefanović 
 19' Yakubu 
 52', 78' Report  Anelka 
 21' Sibierski 
 45' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,120 Referee: Matt Messias 
 Bolton Wanderers  v Portsmouth 
 17 January 2004 22 Bolton Wanderers  1–0 Portsmouth  Bolton , Greater Manchester  Davies 
 53' Report  Stefanović  Red card  90+1' Stadium: Reebok Stadium  Referee: Phil Dowd 
 Portsmouth  v Wolverhampton Wanderers

 31 January 2003 23 Portsmouth  0–0 Wolverhampton Wanderers  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Report  Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,112 Referee: Howard Webb 
 Tottenham Hotspur  v Portsmouth 
 7 February 2004 24 Tottenham Hotspur  4–3 Portsmouth  Haringey , London  Defoe 
 13' Keane 
 41', 78' Poyet 
 89' Report  Berkovic 
 39' LuaLua 
 73' Mornar 
 84' Stadium: White Hart Lane  Attendance: 36,107 Referee: Peter Walton 
 Portsmouth  v Chelsea 
 11 February 2004 25 Portsmouth  0–2 Chelsea  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Report  Parker

 17' Crespo 
 79' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,140 Referee: Graham Poll 
 Portsmouth  v Newcastle United 
 29 February 2004 26 Portsmouth  1–1 Newcastle United  Portsmouth , Hampshire 15:00 LuaLua 
 89' Report  Bellamy 
 34' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,140 Referee: Andy D'Urso 
 Everton  v Portsmouth 
 13 March 2004 27 Everton  1–0 Portsmouth  Merseyside , Liverpool  Rooney 
 78' Report  Stadium: Goodison Park  Referee: Neale Barry 
 Liverpool  v Portsmouth 
 17 March 2004 28 Liverpool  3–0 Portsmouth  Merseyside , Liverpool  Hamann 
 5' Owen 
 28', 58' Report  Stadium: Anfield  Referee: Barry Knight 
 Portsmouth  v Southampton 
 21 March 2004 29  Portsmouth  1–0 Southampton  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Yakubu 
 68' Report  Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,140 Referee: Mark Halsey 
 Blackburn Rovers  v Portsmouth 
 27 March 2004 30 Blackburn Rovers  1–2 Portsmouth  Blackburn , Lancashire  Tugay

 37' Report  Sheringham 
 17' Yakubu 
 82' Stadium: Ewood Park  Attendance: 22,855 Referee: Paul Durkin 
 Charlton Athletic  v Portsmouth 
 10 April 2004 31 Charlton Athletic  1–1 Portsmouth  Greenwich , London  Bartlett 
 8' Report  Yakubu

 65' Stadium: The Valley  Attendance: 26,385 Referee: Andy D'Urso 
 Portsmouth  v Birmingham City 
 12 April 2004 32 Portsmouth  3–1 Birmingham City  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Stefanović 
 45' LuaLua 
 62' Yakubu 
 73' (pen. ) Report  Maik Taylor  Red card  45' John 
 67' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,104 Referee: Barry Knight 
 Portsmouth  v Manchester United 
 17 April 2004 33 Portsmouth  1–0 Manchester United  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Stone 
 36' Report  Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,140 Referee: Neale Barry 
 Leeds United  v Portsmouth 
 25 April 2004 34 Leeds United  1–2 Portsmouth  Leeds , West Yorkshire  Harte

 82' (pen. ) Report  Yakubu

 9' LuaLua 
 51' Stadium: Elland Road  Attendance: 39,273 Referee: Uriah Rennie 
 Portsmouth  v Fulham 
 1 May 2004 35 Portsmouth  1–1 Fulham  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Yakubu

 80' Report  McBride 
 85' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,065 Referee: Steve Dunn 
 Portsmouth  v Arsenal 
 4 May 2004 36 Portsmouth  1–1 Arsenal  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Yakubu

 29' Report  Reyes

 49' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,140 Referee: Mike Riley 
 Leicester City  v Portsmouth 
 8 May 2004 37 Leicester City  3–1 Portsmouth  Leicester , Leicestershire  Taylor 
 6' (o.g. ) Dickov 
 27' Scowcroft 
 71' Report  Quashie 
 66' Stadium: Walkers Stadium  Attendance: 31,536 Referee: Graham Poll 
 Portsmouth  v Middlesbrough 
 15 May 2004 38 Portsmouth  5–1 Middlesbrough  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Yakubu

 4', 14' (pen. ), 31', 83' Sheringham 
 80' Report  Zenden 
 27' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,134 Referee: Mark Halsey 

 FA CUP
 Portsmouth  v Blackpool 
 3 January 2004 2 Portsmouth  2–1 Blackpool  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Schemmel

 36' Yakubu 
 90' Report  Taylor

 43' Evans  Red card  90' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 13,479 Referee: Steve Dunn 
 Portsmouth  v Scunthorpe United 
 24 January 2004 3 Portsmouth  2–1 Scunthorpe United  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Taylor 
 35', 66' Report  Parton 
 86' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 17,508 Referee: Graham Barber 
 Liverpool  v Portsmouth 
 15 February 2004 4 Liverpool  1–1 Portsmouth  Liverpool , Merseyside  Owen

 1' Report  Taylor

 75' Stadium: Anfield  Attendance: 34,669 Referee: Mark Halsey 
 Portsmouth  v Liverpool 
 22 February 2004 5 Portsmouth  1–0 Liverpool  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Hughes

 71' Report  Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 19,529 Referee: Matt Messias 
 Portsmouth  v Arsenal 
 6 March 2003 6 Portsmouth  1–5 Arsenal  Portsmouth , Hampshire 18:00 Sheringham

 90' Report  Henry

 25', 50' Ljungberg 
 43', 57' Touré 
 45' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 20,137 Referee: Jeff Winter 

 LEAGUE CUP
 Portsmouth  v Northampton Town 
 23 September 2003 2 Portsmouth  5–2 Northampton Town  Portsmouth , Hampshire  Sherwood 
 13', ?' Roberts 
 16', 59' Taylor 
 40' Report  Reid  Red card  9' Hargreaves 
 76' (pen. ) Dudfield 
 90' Stadium: Fratton Park  Attendance: 11,130 Referee: David Crick
 Nottingham Forest  v Portsmouth 
 29 October 2003 3 Nottingham Forest  2–4 (a.e.t.) Portsmouth  Nottingham , Nottinghamshire  Bopp 
 42', 67' Report  Walker

 57' (o.g. ) Yakubu 
 64', 108' Roberts 
 101' Stadium: City Ground  Attendance: 20,078 Referee: Howard Webb 
 Southampton  v Portsmouth 
 2 December 2003 4 Southampton  2–0  Portsmouth  Southampton , Hampshire  Beattie 
 33', 90' (pen. ) Report  De Zeeuw  Red card  90' Stadium: St Mary's Stadium  Attendance: 16,791 Referee: Graham Poll 

 AWARDS

     Sheringham      Redknapp 

 STATISTICS



 APPEARANCES AND GOALS
 As of 15 May 2004


 NOTES

  1.       Hislop was born in Hackney , England, and     represented England at U-21      level, but also qualified to represent Trinidad and Tobago      internationally and made his international debut for     Trinidad and Tobago  in 1999.  2.       Harper was born in Oldham , England.  3.       Quashie was born in Southwark , England, and     represented England at U-21  and     B  level, but also qualified to     represent Scotland  internationally through his grandfather and     made his international debut for Scotland      in May 2004.  4.       Péricard was born in Efok, Cameroon , but also qualified to     represent France internationally and has represented them at U-21      level.  5.       Burton was born in Reading , England, but qualified to     represent Jamaica  internationally and made his international     debut for Jamaica  in September 1997.  6.       Roberts was born in Brent , England, but     qualified to represent Grenada      internationally through his father and made his international debut in 1999.  7.       Pulis was born in Bristol , England, but also qualified to     represent Wales  internationally and would     later represent them at U-21      level.
 For other ships with the same name, see London (ship) .
 London was launched in 1832 by Wigrams for Money and H. L. Wigram to carry passengers to India. From 1840 she made two voyages from England  carrying immigrants to New Zealand  for the New Zealand Company . She also made two voyages transporting  convicts  from the United Kingdom to Tasmania . She then became a transport for several years before returning to trading between Newcastle and Spain. She ran into a barque  in 1866 with the result that the barque's crew had to abandon their vessel. London was last listed in 1869.





 CAREER


 London first appeared in Lloyd's Register  (LR) in 1832.



 On 4 June 1832 London, Captain John Wimble, was due to sail to Madras  and Calcutta . London sailed on 19 June, left Madras on 25 September, and arrived at Calcutta on 3 October. On this voyage London carried 300 tons of coal that she had loaded in London. While she was at Calcutta a portion of this cargo ignited spontaneously; the burning cargo was removed. London sustained some damage.  This was the first of several voyages to Calcutta and return that London and Wimble made.
 1st immigrant voyage to New Zealand (1840): London sailed under Captain Henry Shuttleworth for Wellington, leaving the Downs  on 19 August 1840 and arriving at Wellington on 12 December. She arrived with 193 immigrants and 43 cabin passengers. She had left with some 228 immigrants and passengers. She sailed to Calcutta, and left there for London on 27 May 1841. She reached the Cape of Good Hope  on 3 August and arrived back in London on 11 October. 
 2nd immigrant voyage to New Zealand (1842): London, Captain Joseph Thomas Attwood, master, left Gravesend in January 1842. She arrived in Wellington on 1 May 1842 with 182 immigrants. 
 1st convict voyage (1844): On 23 March 1844 London, under Captain John T. Attwood, brought 250 male convicts from Plymouth to Tasmania, arriving on 9 July.  She suffered no convict deaths on the voyage.



 In 1847 London was sold for £5,900 to Teighe & Co. The owners were Thomas Dominick James Teighe (32/64), Charles Teighe (8/64), Robert Dyet (8/64), William Dix (8/64), and Frederick Leachey (8/64).  LR did not catch up with the change of ownership and a change in destination until the 1851 issue.
 2nd convict voyage (1850–1851): Captain J. Sceales sailed from Dublin  on 20 December 1850. London arrived in Hobart on 10 March 1851.  she had embarked 288 male convicts and suffered three convict deaths on the voyage.



 New owners in 1858–1859 transferred London's registry to Newcastle.



 In late 1866 London, Ramsey, master, of Newcastle, was sailing to Newcastle from Cartagena, Spain , when she ran into Palmen, Hendrickson, master. Palman's crew abandoned Palman in a sinking state. On 14 December the Norwegian barque Nanna, Hansen, master, rescued Captain Hendrickson and eight crewmembers at 40°N 12°W .

 FATE


 London was last listed in LR in 1869 (the online copy of LR for 1870 is missing pages), with data unchanged from 1866. She does not appear in the 1871 volume.

 The Sainsbury family (also Lord Sainsbury and family and incorrectly the Sainsbury's family) founded Sainsbury's , the UK's second-largest supermarket chain. Today, the family has many interests, including business, politics, philanthropy, arts, and sciences. 
 This article needs additional citations for verification . (October 2021)

 PRINCIPAL MEMBERS OF THE SAINSBURY FAMILY


 Principal members of the founding family of the UK supermarket chain Sainsbury's  are:
     of the Sainsbury's  supermarket chain     of John James Sainsbury and co-founder of the Sainsbury's     supermarket chain         of John James and Mary Ann Sainsbury             (1902–1998), eldest son of John Benjamin Sainsbury, a Labour life peer         1962 as Lord Sainsbury, later joined the SDP        .                  KG  (1927–2022), eldest          son of Alan Sainsbury, a Conservative life peer  (Baron          Sainsbury of Preston Candover), married to former ballerina Anya Linden                               to Hon. Robert Butler-Sloss, son of Elizabeth Butler-Sloss, Baroness            Butler-Sloss                                    Alan Sainsbury, quiet philanthropist who gave away £100 million.           Entered into a civil partnership with          Stewart Grimshaw shortly before his death.                  (1932–), third son of Alan Sainsbury, former Tory          MP  and Minister, married to Susan Mary          Sainsbury (formerly Mitchell) (b. 1939)                     Conservative, later Labour, MP  The Rt Hon.             Shaun Woodward                                        Peter de Frankopan Subic Zrinski  (né Doimi de            Lupis)                 married name Paulette Anderson                               Benjamin Sainsbury, who, with his wife, Lisa (née Van den Bergh;        1912–2014),  began the collection of        modern and tribal art housed at the Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts         in Norwich  had issue:                 ]          (Elizabeth Clark 19 July 1938 – 14 August 1977), daughter of Robert          Sainsbury                     1964), son of Elizabeth Clark                     ]            (b. 25 February 1966), son of Elizabeth Clark                 (1940–), son of Robert Sainsbury, Labour life peer  (Baron          Sainsbury of Turville), who with his wife, Susan Carroll, The Lady          Sainsbury of Turville, DBE          , has issue:                     In The Playground, to help people understand Asperger syndrome                                   Blakey, had issue:                                   Kanabus, former director of the HIV/AIDS charity AVERT  and          later director of the charity GHE, has issue:                     Sainsbury, left fortune to Prince's Trust  to help            young people become established in farming                  
 FAMILY INVOLVEMENT IN SAINSBURY'S


 No family member works for the company, although John Davan Sainsbury  was the Life President of the firm at his death in 2022.
 The last family member to work for the company was Tim Sainsbury  who retired as a non-executive director in 1999.
 The last family chairman was David Sainsbury  who retired as chairman of the company in 1998. This brought to an end 129 years of management of the group by the Sainsbury family. As a government minister since 1998, his shares were held in a blind trust until 2007.

 FAMILY SHAREHOLDING IN SAINSBURY'S
 The equity interest in Sainsbury's held by the family as of May 2011 is 15%. The family sold down their stake from 35% in 2005. The largest family shareholders are Lord Sainsbury of Turville  with 4.99% and Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover , who controls just under 3% of the company, and benefits from 1.6% of the equity included in the above. The Sunday Times reported in September 2006 that "The Sainsbury family continues to  shares in the £6.2 billion retailer... and for the first time their combined holding has fallen below 20%.”
 The largest shareholder is the Qatar Investment Authority , the investment vehicle of the Qatari royal family of the Gulf Kingdom, who as of May 2011 holds 25.999% of the company.
 Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover's decision to split his 3.89% holding in Sainsbury's between other members of his family in December 2006 suggests that the family may not have sold as many shares as previously thought. The other theory could be that the most senior members of the family, with previous stakes of over 3% (the reportable stock exchange shareholding threshold), could have simply transferred some of their shares to their children (who previously held few shares), rather than having sold shares onto the open market. However, some shares which have been sold were definitely sold to the open market (according to Miss Judith Portrait, the trustee for many Sainsbury family settlements).
 This fall from around 35% increases the possibility of any takeover attempt succeeding. However, the Sainsbury family have managed to use their remaining stake to block takeover bids in the past, as demonstrated by the two failed takeover bids in 2007. A hostile bid for the company may encounter difficulties, without the full support of the Sainsbury family. The halving of the generous dividend yield in recent years may have been a significant factor regarding the family's decision to reduce their shareholdings.

 BUILDINGS SET UP BY THE SAINSBURY FAMILY


 The Sainsbury family has also set up a number of buildings, to house their various interests. These are:
     Centre            (London)     University of Oxford                      in Cardiff      , Covent Garden           and Archaeology at the University of Oxford       quality of lives for people with mental health problems    
 THE SAINSBURY FAMILY CHARITABLE INTERESTS


 Eighteen of the grant-making trusts set up by members of the Sainsbury family, are known collectively as the Sainsbury Family Charitable Trusts.  Institutions whose creation they fostered include the following:
      of East Anglia , comprising:         Centre                          Africa, Oceania and the Americas                          to develop UK engineers into leaders in industry     independent charity to improve government effectiveness     quality of lives for people with mental health problems   Annabel Sainsbury (married name Annabel Kanabus) set up, with her husband, the international AIDS charity AVERT , and the charity GHE.  Adrian Kanabus has set up Adrians Charity.

 Celia Sainsbury (married name Celia Blakey) set up the Celia Blakey Charitable Trust which makes grants to various other charities.
 The Sainsbury family are also major benefactors to English Heritage  and the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty .
 In 2021 The Sunday Times  named the Sainsbury family among the most charitable people for the last 20 years with donations of £3.625 billion.  

 SAINSBURY FAMILY INTERESTS IN POLITICS


 The Sainsbury family also has varying political interests.
     originally a Liberal , but joined the Labour Party     in 1945 and sat on the party benches when appointed to    the House of Lords in 1962. He defected to become a founder member of the    Social Democratic Party  (SDP) in 1981, and    remained with the 'continuing' SDP faction    , led by David Owen ,    following the creation of the Liberal Democrats  in    1988.      took the Conservative     whip      also supported the SDP, but    has taken the Labour whip since 1997, and was Science and Innovation Minister    in the Blair government  (1998–2006)     for Hove, 1973–97     , who started as a Conservative but defected to Labour in    1999.

 Mount Kurikoma, also known as Kurikomayama and Sukawadake is an active  stratovolcano  in Japan that stands 1,627 m (5,338 ft) tall. The volcano is located in Iwate Prefecture  on Honshu. In addition to recent eruptions, the volcano is seismically active. It is the main feature of Kurikoma Quasi-National Park  and a tourist attraction due to its hot springs, hiking trails and flora. 


 Mount Kurikoma composition is mostly andesitic to dacitic which formed atop elevated Tertiary dacitic tuffs and sedimentary rocks; hence the volcano's volume is smaller than its height suggests. In the early construction phase, lava erupted 500 thousand years ago to the north and south. It was followed by the formation of Higashi-Kurikoma. The volcanic cone Magusadake was last active 100 thousand years ago. The summit features a caldera  4 km (2.5 mi) across which is breached to the north and occupied by the Tsurugi-dake cone.  The volcano's base consists of Tertiary to Quaternary pyroclasts including sedimentary and welded tuffs. A major active reverse fault runs east to southeast of the summit.

 Since 915 AD, at least two eruptions have occurred; one in 1944. Between 5,400 years and 915 years ago, two more phreatic eruptions occurred. Dead trees in Showa Lake, within the volcanic complex, suggest the production of volcanic gases. The 1944 eruption occurred at the present location of Showa Lake. It killed many fishes when water in the Iwaki River  became discolored. Seismic activity around the volcano is frequest; the most significant was the MJMA  7.2 earthquake  that struck on 14 June 2008. The 45 km (28 mi) long aftershock zone encompassed the volcano.  The earthquake triggered many large landslides around the volcano's flanks, some which were destructive and deadly. 

 SEE ALSO

   * List of mountains in Japan 

 Guillermo García López  and Albert Montañés  were the defending champions, but only García López chose to participate this year. He played with Rainer Schüttler . However, they lost to Marco Chiudinelli  and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga  already in the first round. 3rd seeds Marc López  and Rafael Nadal  won this event, by defeating Daniele Bracciali  and Andreas Seppi  6–3, 7–6(7–4) in the final.

 Main article: 2011 Qatar Open 

 SEEDS

  1. Serbia         Viktor Troicki  / Serbia         Nenad Zimonjić  (first round)  2. Czech Republic         František Čermák  / Germany         Christopher Kas  (quarterfinals)  3. Spain         Marc López  / Spain         Rafael Nadal  (champions)  4. Slovakia         Filip Polášek  / Ukraine         Sergiy Stakhovsky  (quarterfinals)

 DRAW



 KEY
             
 DRAW
 First round Quarterfinals Semifinals Final 1        V Troicki         Zimonjić 
 4 77           T Gabashvili         Kohlschreiber 
 6 62    Russia T Gabashvili  Germany P Kohlschreiber  77 7            M Chiudinelli         Tsonga 
 6 6            M Chiudinelli         Tsonga 
 63 5            G García López         Schüttler 
 1 2            T Gabashvili         Kohlschreiber 
 4 4   3        M López         Nadal 
 6 7   3        M López         Nadal 
 6 6            D Marrero         Riba 
 3 5   3 Spain M López  Spain R Nadal  6 6   WC        M Ghareeb         Zaid 
 4 77  WC        M Ghareeb         Zaid 
 2 0   WC        R El Amrani         El Harib
 6 65  3 Spain M López  Spain R Nadal  6 77            E Gulbis         Zverev 
 5 6           D Bracciali         Seppi 
 3 64            F Fognini         Zelenay 
 7 3    Italy F Fognini  Slovakia I Zelenay  6 6            J Brunström         Nieminen 
 3 63   4        F Polášek         Stakhovsky 
 2 4   4 Slovakia F Polášek  Ukraine S Stakhovsky  6 77            F Fognini         Zelenay 
 1 6           D Gimeno–Traver         Ramírez Hidalgo 
 2 3            D Bracciali         Seppi 
 6 4           D Bracciali         Seppi 
 6 6     Italy D Bracciali  Italy A Seppi  6 6            M Fyrstenberg         Hănescu 
 2 2   2        F Čermák         Kas 
 1 4   2        F Čermák         Kas 
 6 6  

 REFERENCES

  * Main Draw 

 John Cunningham (22 February 1938 – 1 December 2021) was a Roman Catholic  prelate  who served as Bishop of Galloway  from 2004 to 2014.






        portal 

 BIOGRAPHY


 Cunningham  was born in Paisley, Renfrewshire , Scotland, on 22 February 1938.  He was educated at St Mary's College, Blairs  and St. Peter's Seminary, Cardross . Later he was a student of the Scots College, Rome   from where he attended the Pontifical Gregorian University .
 He was ordained  to the priesthood  on 29 June 1961.  From 1967 to 1981, he was extramural professor  of Canon Law  at St Peter's College, Glasgow . He was parish priest at St Patrick's, Greenock  from 1992 to 2004 and was appointed Papal  Chaplain  in 1994. From 1997 to 2004 he was Vicar General  of the Diocese of Paisley . He was made a Prelate of Honour  in 1999.

 On the day Maurice Taylor  retired on 7 April 2004, Cunningham was appointed the Bishop  of the Diocese of Galloway  by the Holy See . He was consecrated  to the Episcopate  on 28 May 2004, the principal consecrator  being Cardinal Keith O'Brien , Archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh  with co-consecrating bishops Maurice Taylor , Bishop Emeritus  of Galloway and John Mone , Bishop of Paisley .


 Cunningham retired on 22 November 2014 when Pope Francis ' appointment of William Nolan  as his successor was announced. He died on 1 December 2021, at the age of 83.



 Anna Katarzyna Karaszewska (born March 10, 1970)  is a Polish sociologist, economic and social activist and president of the board of the Congress of Women (2019–Present).
 This article is an orphan , as no other articles link to it . Please introduce links  to this page from related articles ; try the Find link tool  for suggestions. (September 2022)



 EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION


 Karaszewska graduated in sociology from the Faculty of Applied Social Sciences at the University of Warsaw , she continued her education in doctoral studies in the field of public and political promotion of women and graduated to gain both her MA and Ph.D. from Warsaw School of Economics. Furthermore, she gained an MA from the College of Europe , Bruges. 


 CAREER


 Karaszewska became faculty at the Warsaw School of Economics while lecturing at MA and postgraduate courses from 1999 to 2011. During 2009, she became one of the founding members of Poland's Women's Congress and later became its president.  

 Following this, Karaszewska co-created Poland's first national network of female entrepreneurs and a support system for further development among Polish women in 2012. 

 Additionally, during 2013-2014 Karaszewska went on to become the deputy general director at the confederation "Lewiatan", an organisation working to create favourable conditions for the development of the economy and entrepreneurship in Poland , for which Karaszewska organised their activities in Brussels. 

 During 2019, Karaszewska went on to be nominated to join the Warsaw Council for Women by the major of Warsaw. The council focuses on building an equality and women's rights in addition to safety and support programs for women, vaccinations against HPV, and access to healthcare without the conscience clause. 

 AWARDS AND RECOGNITION


 In 2005, Karaszewska was awarded the Silver Cross of Merit  by the president of the Republic of Poland Aleksander Kwaśniewski . Additionally, she was a participant in the international mentoring program for women leaders, held by the US Department of state and Fortune magazine .



 PERSONAL LIFE


 Karaszewska is Polish and speaks English and French fluently.


 This is a list of VIC-20  games. See lists of video games  for other gaming platforms. A section at the bottom contains games written by hobbyists long after the mainstream popularity of the VIC-20 waned. Many of these are unlicensed clones of arcade games or games from other systems.
 There are 400 commercial and 26 hobbyist-developed games on this list
 Contents                                
 0–9

      
 A

                                                                
 B

                                                      
 C

                               
 D

                    
 E-F

           
 G-H

                     
 I-J

         
 K-L

            
 M

                                 
 N-O

     
 P

                              
 Q-R

                                
 S

                                                         
 T

                
 U-V

              
 W-X-Y-Z

         
 HOBBYIST-DEVELOPED GAMES

                                       * WhackE (2009)

 The OS 2200  communications management system includes CPComm and MCB along with many programs that provide communications related functions such as file transfer, e-mail, and distributed transaction processing protocols.


 CPCOMM


 CPComm executes as a real time program in a background run.  CPComm implements the protocol stacks.
 CPComm communicates with the CIOP (Communications I/O Processor) to connect to networks. CPcommOS is a variant for 2200 Series systems implemented on Intel architectures. In the most recent systems only various speeds of Ethernet communications are supported. Previous systems supported ATM and FDDI but these were dropped through lack of interest.
 CPComm and the Exec jointly handle authentication of connection requests and authorization for users and terminals to connect to time-sharing, and the various transaction application groups. SSL is supported for every connection. CPComm has software implementations of the encryption algorithms required for SSL.
 CPComm includes the protocols and connections to time-sharing and transaction message queues. One of the most heavily used legacy protocols is INT1 which is a TCP/IP variant of the UNISCOPE /UTS green-screen terminal protocol.
 TCP/IP v4 and TCP/IP v6 along with SNMP v1 and v3 are supported by CPComm.

 MCB


 The Message Control Bank (MCB) is a protected subsystem  that implements the message queues for transaction processing. It communicates with the transaction scheduler in the Exec. It also provides the APIs for applications to send and receive messages from the queues.


 COMAPI


 COMAPI is a sockets implementation for OS2200. It is a protected subsystem that provides APIs for programs that wish to communicate directly with the network. In addition to all the traditional sockets APIs for C, APIs are provided for all the other programming languages.


 CPFTP


 cpFTP is a program that provides both client and server FTP capability for OS 2200. 

 WEBTS


 WebTS, the OS 2200 Web Transaction Server, is a full implementation of the HTTP  and HTTPS  protocol stacks. Server scripting using Java applets is supported, but the primary usage of WebTS is its full integration with OS 2200 including all security and transaction processing. 
 Transactions initiated via WebTS are subject to the same authentication as any other transaction and run with the same performance, scaling, and recovery. Such transactions may use the CGI APIs for communications with the client. Transactions developed for OS 2200 using the DPS display manager, typically require no changes or even recompilation to be fully operational with Web interfaces concurrently with terminals. Changes to DPS combined with client-side Java applets make everything transparent to the transaction program.


 White Star (1949 – 1961) was a Tennessee Walking Horse  mare  who won her breed's World Grand Championship  in 1954. After her Championship win, she was exhibited in multiple shows across the United States.



 LIFE AND CAREER


 White Star was foaled  on April 8, 1949 at Willow Oak Acres, Prescott, Arkansas . She was sired by Sir Maugray and out of the mare Crain's Merry Lady. Her grandsires were Wilson's Allen  and Merry Boy. She was dark in color and had an odd appearance as a foal, which led her owners to name her Strange Gal.  As she grew she proved to be a gray , and faded in color fairly quickly; by 1954 her haircoat was pure white in color.  Trained by Percy Moss, she began competing in horse shows  as a three-year-old, and winning multiple shows. In 1952 she competed in the Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration  for the first time and placed 5th in her age division. The next year she placed second in the mares class and was sixth out of ten horses in the World Grand Championship .  In December 1953 she was sold to W. V. Garnier of Bastrop, Louisiana , and renamed White Star. Moss moved to Bastrop from Arkansas so he could continue training her. Ridden by Moss, who was only 23 years old at the time, she won the World Grand Championship in the 1954 Celebration.   Following her World Grand Championship, White Star was exhibited at "every large horse show" in the United States. White Star died on December 29, 1961. Her death was front-page news across the United States.


 Louis Joseph Barnes (13 January 1906 – 2 June 1983) was a member of the Queensland Legislative Assembly .





 Barnes was born at Gympie , Queensland , the son of George Daniel Barnes and his wife Bridget Maria (née Gorey). He was educated at the Christian Brothers' College in Gympie and after leaving school was a tea merchant in 1932, a traveler for the Castlemaine Perkins  and from 1947 until 1975 a men's Mercer  at Beaudesert .
 On 24 April 1934 he married Muriel Eileen Burke  and together had two sons. Later changing his middle name to Gabriel, Barnes died at Southport  in June 1983 and was buried in the Southport Lawn Cemetery.

 PUBLIC CAREER


 Barnes, a member of the King O'Malley  Labor Party, won the 1942 by-election for the seat of Cairns  in the Queensland Legislative Assembly.  The by-election was caused by the death of John O'Keefe  in January of that year.  He went on to represent the electorate until 1947  when he was defeated by Thomas Crowley  at that year's state elections.

 After his defeat, Barnes was an alderman on the Gold Coast City Council  from 1949 until 1952.  His brother, Frank Barnes , was the member for Bundaberg  from 1941 to 1950.


 Gaius Cestius Gallus (d. 67 AD) was a Roman senator  and general who was active during the Principate . He was suffect consul  for the second nundinium  of the year 42 as the colleague of Gaius Caecina Largus .  Gallus was the son of Gaius Cestius Gallus , ordinary consul in 35.

 GOVERNOR OF SYRIA


 Gallus was proconsul of Syria  from 63 or 65. He marched into Judea  with a force of over 30,000 men in September 66 in an attempt to restore order at the outset of the First Jewish–Roman War . As assembled at Antioch , Gallus' army comprised Legio XII Fulminata , detachments from the three other legions based in Syria, six cohorts of auxiliary infantry  and four alae  of cavalry. These regular troops were supported by 14,000 allies provided by Agrippa II  and other client rulers.


 JEWISH REVOLT


 With his force reduced by detachments sent to occupy Galilee and the Judean coast, Gallus turned inland to subdue Jerusalem. After suffering losses amongst his baggage train and rearguard, Gallus reached Mount Scopus  and penetrated the outer city, but was apparently unable to take The Temple Mount . After a siege of nine days, Gallus decided to fall back to the coast. His decision appears to have been based on the loss of siege equipment by ambush and the threatened cutting of his supply lines as the October rains began. 
 The war-like faction in Jerusalem, under Shimon bar Giora , rose up against the Roman contingent, pursuing them as far as Antipatris , via Beit Horon .


 Josephus  initially estimated the number of Roman losses at 515, but in the ensuing rout, the dead among the Imperial Roman army numbered 5300 infantrymen , and 380 cavalrymen . This incident befell the Roman army in the lunar month of Heshvan , during the 12th year of the reign of Nero , and marked the beginning of the war with Rome.

 DEATH


 Soon after his return to Syria, and before the spring of 67, Gallus died.  According to Titus Flavius Josephus  the legate was broken by shame at a major and unexpected Roman defeat. Gallus was succeeded in the governorship of Syria by Licinius Mucianus .  Emperor Nero  appointed the future Emperor Vespasian  as commander of the Roman forces assembled in the province to crush the rebellion in Judea.

 SEE ALSO

  * Cestia gens 

 Francis E. Rodgers (November 15, 1909 – February 8, 2000) was an American Democratic Party  politician who was among the longest-serving mayors  in U.S. history, first elected in 1946 as Mayor of Harrison, New Jersey . He served in the position for 48 years from 1946 to 1995, having been elected to 24 consecutive two-year terms in office.  On May 30, 1987, Rodgers earned a place in the Guinness Book of World Records  when he surpassed Mayor Erastus Corning II  of Albany, New York , who died in office in 1983 after having served 40 years, 4 months and 28 days in office. The town marked the occasion by closing municipal offices in the mayor's honor and by letting students in the Harrison Public Schools  have a day off.  However, Mayor Hilmar Moore  of Richmond, Texas, served a much longer span of 63 years in office until he died in 2012. 



 BIOGRAPHY


 He was born in Harrison on November 15, 1909, to Michael Rodgers and Johanna Davin, and attended St. Benedict's Preparatory School  in Newark .  Rodgers ran for the Harrison Town Council for the first time in 1935, and served there for ten years, including a term when he was re-elected to the office while serving 27 months in the United States Army  during World War II  in the Counterintelligence Corps .

 Rodgers defeated incumbent Frederick J. Gassert in his first bid for the mayoralty, a candidate backed by Jersey City  Mayor Frank Hague 's Hudson County  Democratic Party machine. Over his years in office, Rodgers had served as Town Clerk, as County Clerk, as a member of the Hudson County Board of Chosen Freeholders  and as the Board's clerk. He served two terms in the New Jersey Senate , from 1978 to 1984, defeating Independent incumbent Anthony Imperiale . 
 Rodgers served on numerous state authorities and commissions, including being appointed secretary of the New Jersey Racing Commission by Governor  Richard J. Hughes  in 1963, to the New Jersey Highway Authority  in 1976 by Governor Brendan Byrne , and to the New Jersey Turnpike Authority  by Republican Governor Thomas Kean  in 1984. 
 Rodgers won his final election campaign in November 1992 by a narrow 111 vote margin out of 3,600 votes cast, in this heavily-Democratic community, having been unable to campaign due to a chronic knee injury.  Rodgers cited the injury and his desire to allow a younger generation to serve in office as his justification for declining to run for a 25th term in office. He was succeeded by Raymond J. McDonough.  He maintained his position as chairman of the Harrison Democratic Committee after leaving office in 1995.

 Rodgers was inducted into the Mayors' Hall of Fame in 1995 by the New Jersey State League of Municipalities , having been the prime proponent for the creation of the hall during his tenure with the organization. 
 Rodgers died on February 8, 2000, and was buried at Holy Cross Cemetery  in North Arlington, New Jersey . 
 For the artificial archipelago in Hainan, China, see Phoenix Island .
 The Phoenix Islands,  or Rawaki, are a group of eight atolls  and two submerged coral  reefs  that lie east of the Gilbert Islands  and west of the Line Islands  in the central Pacific Ocean , north of Samoa . They are part of the Republic of Kiribati . Their combined land area is 28 square kilometres (11 sq mi). The only island of any commercial importance is Canton Island  (also called Abariringa). The other islands are Enderbury, Rawaki (formerly Phoenix), Manra (formerly Sydney), Birnie, McKean, Nikumaroro (formerly Gardner), and Orona (formerly Hull).

 This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it  or discuss these issues on the talk page . (Learn how and when to remove these template messages ) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards . (January 2020)

 This article needs editing to comply with Wikipedia's Manual of Style . (January 2020)




 The Phoenix Islands Protected Area , established in 2008, is one of the world's largest protected areas  and is home to about 120 species of coral and more than 500 species of fish. All of the Phoenix Islands are uninhabited, except for a few families who live on Canton Island .
 At various times in history, the Phoenix Islands have been considered part of the Gilberts Island group (which itself was sometimes known as the Kingsmill island group).
 Geographically, Baker Island  and Howland Island , two unincorporated territories  of the United States  that lie to the north of the Phoenix Islands, could be considered part of the same island group as the Phoenix Islands. However, politically, and for statistical compilation purposes, Howland and Baker are considered part of the group known as the United States Minor Outlying Islands .
 At one time, the United States laid claim to all the Phoenix Islands under the 1856 Guano Islands Act . However, when Kiribati became an independent republic in 1979, the United States and Kiribati signed the Treaty of Tarawa , under which the United States released all claims to the Phoenix Islands (except for Baker and Howland), which thenceforth became recognized as part of Kiribati.
 The Phoenix Islands began to be known by that name sometime around the 1840s, as a generalization from one of the islands in the group, which had been named Phoenix Island  earlier in the century (probably because Phoenix was a common name for the whaling ships that frequented the nearby waters at the time).
 During the late 1930s, the Phoenix Islands were the site of the last colonial expansion attempted by the British Empire  (through the Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme ).

 GEOGRAPHY, FLORA AND FAUNA




 CANTON ISLAND
 Main article: Canton Island  to Canton Island's Lagoon. Village site is to the left.
 Canton Island  (also called Abariringa), is the northernmost island in the Phoenix group, and the only inhabited one. It is a narrow ribbon of land 9 km2 (3 sq mi), enclosing a lagoon of approximately 40 km2 (15 sq mi). Canton is mostly bare coral, covered with herbs, bunch grasses, low shrubs and a few trees. Its lagoon teems with 153 known species of marine life, including sharks, tuna, stingrays and eels. Land fauna includes at least 23 bird species, as well as lizards, rats, hermit crabs and turtles.
 In the mid-20th century, Canton had an important trans-Pacific airport and refueling station, called Langton, but its importance declined in the late 1950s with the introduction of long-range jet aircraft. After a brief stint as a U.S. missile-tracking station, the airport fell into disuse. However, today, the airport is still there, and (as of 2016 ) it was still home to a small military presence: 20 persons were residing there, mostly living in the buildings erected during the occupation of the island by Great Britain and the United States between 1936 and 1976. 

 ENDERBURY ISLAND
 Enderbury  is a low, flat, small coral atoll lying 63 km (34 nmi; 39 mi) east-southeast of Canton. Its lagoon is rather tiny, comprising only a small percentage of the island's area. Herbs, bunchgrass, morning-glory vines and a few clumps of trees form the main vegetation on the island, while birds, rats and a species of beetle are the known fauna. Heavily mined for guano  in the late 19th century, Enderbury has seen little human impact following the evacuation of the last four residents in 1942, during World War II . 

 BIRNIE ISLAND
 Birnie Island  is a small, flat coral island  about 20 hectares (49 acres) in area, measuring 1.2 km (0.75 mi) long by 0.5 km (0.3 mi) wide. It contains a tiny lagoon, which has all but dried up. A nesting place for flocks of seabirds, Birnie is devoid of trees and is instead covered with low shrubs and grass. Unlike most of the other Phoenix Islands, Birnie does not appear to have been worked for guano or otherwise exploited by humans.  It was declared a wildlife sanctuary in 1975.

 MCKEAN ISLAND
 McKean Island  is the northwesternmost island of the Phoenix group. Its area is 57 hectares (140 acres), and it is devoid of fresh water or trees, though it does have a hypersaline lagoon at its center. Carpeted with low herbs and grasses, McKean provides a sanctuary for the world's largest nesting population of lesser frigatebird  (Fregata ariel), with a population of up to 85,000 birds. Actively worked for guano in the mid-19th century, it was abandoned by 1870, and no further use has been made of it.


 RAWAKI ISLAND
 Rawaki , or Phoenix Island, measures approximately 1.2 km (0.75 mi) by 0.8 km (0.5 mi), and covers 65 hectares (160 acres) in area. Its lagoon is shallow and salty, with no connection to the ocean. It does, however, have several freshwater pools—the only known freshwater wetlands in the Phoenix Islands.  Treeless, Rawaki is covered with herbs and grasses, and provides another important landing site for migratory seabirds. Worked for guano from 1859 to 1871, Rawaki was abandoned and no human use seems to have been made of it thereafter. 

 MANRA ISLAND
 Manra , or Sydney Island, measures approximately 3.2 by 2.8 km (2.0 by 1.7 mi). It has a large, salty lagoon with depths reportedly varying from between 5 and 6 metres (16 and 20 ft). The island is covered with coconut palms, scrub forest, herbs and grasses, including the species Tournefortia , Pisonia , Morinda , Cordia , Guettarda , and Scaevola . Manra contains definite evidence of prehistoric inhabitation, in the form of at least a dozen platforms and remains of enclosures in the northeast and northwest portions of the island. K. P. Emory , an ethnologist  at Honolulu 's Bishop Museum , has estimated that two groups of people were present on Manra, one having migrated there from eastern Polynesia , the other from Micronesia . Wells and pits apparently dug by these early inhabitants were also found.

 Extensively worked for guano  beginning in 1884 by John T. Arundel  & Co, Manra was developed into a copra  plantation in the early 20th century. In 1938, Manra was selected as one of three atolls to be included in the Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme , which represented the final expansion of the British Empire. Manra was subsequently plagued by drought and the death of the project's organizer. Due to these events, the effects of World War II and the declining copra market, the island was abandoned in 1963.

 NIKUMARORO
 Nikumaroro , or Gardner Island, is approximately 6 km (3.7 mi) long by 2 km (1.2 mi) wide, enclosing a large central lagoon. Vegetation is profuse, including scrub forest, coconut palms and herbs. Large quantities of birds nest on the island, which was once the headquarters for the British colonial officer heading up the Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme , Gerald Gallagher . Gallagher constructed a village on the western end of the atoll, with wide, coral-paved streets, a parade ground, a cooperative store, an administrative center and residence, and a radio shack.
 Gallagher died on Nikumaroro in 1941, and was buried on the island (where his empty grave monument can still be seen, though his remains were later moved to Tarawa ).  Like the other atolls in the settlement project, Nikumaroro was abandoned in 1963 due to the scarcity of fresh water , together with the declining market for the copra that had been produced on the island.
 In recent years, Nikumaroro has appeared in media stories due to a theory that Amelia Earhart  might have landed her plane at low tide on the edge of the atoll's barrier reef during her fateful around-the-world attempt in 1937. The International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery  (TIGHAR) made several expeditions to Nikumaroro during the 1990s and first decade of the 21st century, finding possible evidence, but no conclusive proof, for this theory.  Investigation and expeditions to the island continue. 

 ORONA ISLAND
 Orona , or Hull Island, measures approximately 8.8 by 4 km (5.5 by 2.5 mi), and, like Canton, is a narrow ribbon of land surrounding a sizable lagoon with depths of between 15 and 20 metres (49 and 66 ft). Like Manra, it is covered with coconut palms, scrub forest, and grasses; it also contains evidence of prehistoric Polynesian  habitation. An ancient stone marae  stands on the eastern tip of the island, together with ruins of shelters, graves and other platforms.  Unlike Manra, Orona does not seem to have been worked for guano, but it became a coconut plantation and was made a part of the British Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme. Residents were evacuated in 1963, due to drought and the declining copra market.
 of the Settlement Scheme and Enderbury Island 

 HISTORY OF THE ISLANDS



 EARLY HISTORY
 There is evidence to suggest that Howland Island was the site of a prehistoric settlement, which may have extended down to Rawaki, Canton, Manra and Orona—probably in the form of a single community making use of several adjacent islands. Archaeological sites have been discovered on Manra and Orona that suggest there were two distinct groups of settlers, one from eastern Polynesia, and one from Micronesia.  The hard life on these isolated islands undoubtedly led either to the extinction or emigration of these settled peoples, in much the same way that other islands in the area (such as Christmas Island  and Pitcairn ) were abandoned. 
 These ancient settlements were probably founded around 1000 BC, when eastern Melanesians  are known to have travelled northwards across the water.  Later settlement by Polynesians, and contact with Polynesia, is evident from archaeological digs. These have yielded basalt artifacts that originated in Samoa, the Marquesas, and the Cook Islands, and were transported to the Phoenix and Line Islands during the 12th–14th centuries AD. 

 SECONDARY DISCOVERY AND MAPPING OF THE ISLANDS
 In 1568, when Spanish navigator Álvaro de Mendaña de Neira  was commanded to explore the South Pacific, he sailed between the Line Islands  and the Phoenix Islands without sighting land, ultimately discovering "Isla de Jesus" (probably one of the islands in the Ellice group ).

 The oceans of the mid-Pacific and Micronesia  opened up to new exploration in the early 19th century as whalers  from Europe and the Americas began arriving.  An influx of whaling vessels in the 1820s led to the secondary discovery and mapping of the islands between 1821 and 1825.  They were the last islands in the Pacific to be fully explored and charted, probably because they were predominantly small, low, and isolated.

 While it is clear that early 19th-century whalers were responsible for discovering most of Kiribati in the modern era, it is impossible to confirm exactly who discovered each of the islands, due to conflicting reports and inaccurate mapping.  Jeremiah N. Reynolds 's 1828 report to the American Navy recommended an exploring expedition to the Pacific because "the English charts, and those of other countries are as yet very imperfect. Much of their information has been obtained from loose accounts from whalers who were careless in some instances, and forgetful in others, and which were seized with greediness by the makers of maps and charts, in order to be the first to make these discoveries known."

 This proposal came to fruition in the 1840s, when Charles Wilkes  led the United States Exploring Expedition , consisting of the USS Peacock  and the USS Flying Fish . The expedition surveyed the islands under the direction of William Hudson . 

 IDENTIFYING THE SECONDARY DISCOVERERS


 Contemporary reports and later analysis provide conflicting evidence regarding the identification of the initial discoverers, a state of affairs only complicated by the numerous names given to each of the atolls.
 In 1828, the U.S. Navy commissioned J.N. Reynolds to compile a survey of American discoveries in the South Pacific. Reynolds interviewed several New England  whalers and inspected their logbooks, charts and documents. His report included at least 13 islands that fit roughly within the Phoenix group, but the coordinates he gave do not always compare to the now-established coordinates of that area.

 Other contemporary reports of the islands added to the confusion about the details of the initial discoveries. The Frenchman Louis Tromelin  reported his 1823 discovery of Phoenix island at 3°42'S, 170°43'W, while cartographer John Arrowsmith  plotted it 12 minutes further north; a rediscovery of Sydney is at 4°26'30", 171°18'. The same year, James Coffin  recorded "Enderby's Island" at 3°10', 171°10.

 The United States Exploring Expedition  seems to have been the first to use the name "Phoenix" to refer to the whole island group. It had previously been used only to refer to one of the islands within the group. 
 MCKEAN ISLAND
 McKean Island was the first of the Phoenix group to be reported and named. It was discovered on May 28, 1794, by a British captain, Henry Barber , of the ship Arthur.  Barber named it Drummond's Island, plotting it at 3°40'S, 176°51'W.  It was later named Arthur Island and appeared as such in charts of the time and was recorded as located at 3°30'S, 176°0'W.  On August 19, 1840, Commander Charles Wilkes  of the United States Exploring Expedition  mapped it and renamed it McKean Island, after a member of his crew.
 ENDERBURY ISLAND
 Captain James Coffin of the British whaler Transit is credited with having discovered Enderbury Island in 1823, and to have named it "Enderby's Island" after the London whaling house of that name.  However, when Coffin described his discoveries to Arrowsmith and other geographers, he did not mention Enderbury.

 BIRNIE ISLAND AND MANRA (SYDNEY ISLAND)
 Birnie and Sydney Islands are reported to have been discovered in 1823 by a “Captain Emmett”. This may have been the Captain Emmett (or "Emmert" or "Emment") of the British whaler Sydney Packet  (or the Sydney), who may have named the islands after the ship and its owner, the London firm Alexander Birnie & Co. Alternatively, it may have been Captain William Emmett, from Sydney , who sailed regularly in the area and is known to have bought the brig  Queen Charlotte from the whaler James Birnie (of the Birnie ship owning family) in 1820.  Frenchman Louis Tromelin  came upon Sidney's Island, either in 1823 or 1828, and placed it at 4°26'30", 171°18'; he went on to survey Phoenix Island . 
 CANTON ISLAND OR KANTON OR ABARIRINGA
 Two islands that were reported and charted in 1825 with coordinates similar to those of Canton Island were referred to in those documents as "Mary Island" and "Mary Balcoutts Island".  In addition, Reynold's report describes a "Barney's Island" roughly at Canton's position, which may have been named and discovered by Capt. Joseph Barney of Equator, who was whaling in the area in 1823–4.  The island was given the name "Canton" in 1872 by Commander Richard W. Meade of USS Narragansett , who named it after the whaling ship Canton, which had been wrecked there in 1854. 
 NIKUMARORO (GARDNER ISLAND)
 On January 8, 1824, Capt. Kemin, of an unnamed ship, discovered what may have been Gardner Island (at 4°45'S, 186°20'15"E) and McKean Island, naming them the "Kemin Islands".  In 1825, Captain Joshua Gardner, reportedly aboard the whaler Ganges , discovered an island located at 4°20' S, 174°22' W, and named it "Gardner's Island". His discovery was reported in the Nantucket Enquirer in December 1827.  However, Joshua Coffin (also reportedly aboard the Ganges) is sometimes credited with the discovery, and is said to have named the island after his ship's owner, Gideon Gardner . 
 During the United States Exploring Expedition  of 1838–1842, Charles Wilkes  identified Gardner's Island based on the previously reported position, and confirmed its existence. 
 RAWAKI (PHOENIX ISLAND)
 The Frenchman Louis Tromelin , aboard the corvette  Bayonnaise, came across Phoenix Island, (as well as Sydney Island, discussed above), probably in 1828  (but some sources give 1823 as the date).  and 1826.  Tromelin placed the island at 3°42'S, 189°17'E, and noted his belief that it had already been reported on Norie's map.  Reynold's report also mentions an island referred to as "Phenix", as well as other unnamed islands, at similar coordinates. The island's discoverer and the origin of its name are unknown, but there are several possible candidates: the whaling ship Phoenix  of Nantucket, Massachusetts , which was active in the area and was the discoverer of Winslow Reef ;  the London whaler Phoenix, owned by Daniel Bennett (W. Bennett & Co), which was whaling in the Pacific in 1815;  the Phoenix , under the command of John Palmer in 1824; and another vessel named the Phoenix , under the command of a Captain Moore, which was in the Pacific in 1794. 
 ORONA (HULL ISLAND)
 Little is known about the discovery of Hull Island, but its existence was confirmed by the United States Exploring Expedition  in 1841, which found it to be inhabited), and it was named by Charles Wilkes , after Commodore Isaac Hull . 
 WINSLOW REEF
 The reef was discovered in 1851 by the whaler Phoenix . Perry Winslow  was the master of the ship on that occasion.  Some have speculated this could have been the ship after which the Phoenix Island group is named, but several other whaling ships of the time were also named Phoenix,  and one of the individual islands in the group had already been reported at an earlier date to bear the name “Phoenix Island”.
 CARONDELET REEF
 Reynold's report of 1828 included an unnamed reef at coordinates similar to those of Carondelet Reef. 
 BAKER ISLAND
 In August 1825, Captain Obed Starbuck  of the whaler Loper sighted a low, barren island at 0°11'N, 176°20'W, which he named "New Nantucket" after his home (Nantucket, Massachusetts ). Starbuck had previously discovered islands in the Ellice group . The island was later named after Capt. Michael Baker, who had discovered guano  deposits on the island in 1839.  Today, Baker Island is a United States territory; it is one of the U.S. Minor Outlying Islands .
 HOWLAND ISLAND
 Howland Island is United States territory, and one of the U.S. Minor Outlying Islands . The discovery of Howland Island is sometimes credited to Captain George B Worth of the Nantucket whaler Oeno , around 1822, who called it "Worth Island".  Daniel MacKenzie of the American whaler Minerva Smith, charted the island in 1828, and, believing it to be a new discovery, named it after his ship's owners.


 LATER HISTORY
 Most of the Phoenix Islands were annexed by Great Britain in the late 19th century. The United States claimed Howland and Baker Islands  in 1935. In 1937, Britain incorporated all the islands in the Phoenix group, except for Howland and Baker islands, into the Gilbert and Ellice Islands  colony. The United States claimed sovereignty over Canton and Enderbury in 1938, but in 1939 entered into an agreement with Britain to form the Canton and Enderbury Islands  condominium  and exercise joint control over the two islands for a term of 50 years.  (The agreement continued in force until 1979, when it was nullified by Kiribati independence.)  During this period of joint U.S.-British control, Canton was extensively developed, first as a seaplane-landing site, then later as a refueling station for trans-Pacific civilian and military aircraft. It remained in use until 1958.
 Although shelled and bombed a few times during World War II, neither Canton nor any of the Phoenix Islands was ever occupied by Japanese forces.
 Between 1938 and 1940, in an effort to reduce overcrowding on the Gilbert Islands , the previously uninhabited Orona (Hull), Manra (Sydney), and Nikumaroro (Gardner) islands were colonised, as part of the Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme .  By 1963, however, the settlements on these three islands were deemed to be unworkable, and the entire population was moved to the Solomon Islands.
 During the 1960s and early 1970s, the United States used Canton as a missile-tracking station. The island was before abandoned altogether in 1976, but then later resettled by members of the I-Kiribati  community, who continue to reside there today. In 2008, the government of Kiribati designated the islands the “Phoenix Islands Protected Area ”, which was at the time the world's largest marine protected area . Collaborations between Kiribati, the New England Aquarium , and Conservation International have allowed scientific expeditions to explore the Phoenix Islands in order to quantify the ocean's flora and fauna. This area is of particular scientific interest because it has been relatively untouched by human activity. 
 The Phoenix Islands have been surveyed by TIGHAR  in an attempt to determine whether they may have been the landing site of Amelia Earhart , the pilot who disappeared in 1937 over the central Pacific Ocean near Howland Island  while she was attempting a circumnavigational  flight of the globe.

 In May 2010, it was reported that a British sailor, Alex Bond, from Penryn, Cornwall, had saved a group of "desperate and starving" Kanton islanders after chancing upon them on his way to Australia. He happened to pull into a lagoon near Canton Island  (which is the only habitable island in the Phoenix Islands chain, and lies to the northeast of Australia), whereupon he discovered that its 24 residents were destitute. A supply ship that had been expected to bring them food four months earlier had never arrived, and the 10 children and 14 adults had been surviving on fish and coconuts. At the time, Bond was reportedly working for a UK-based disaster-relief charity, ShelterBox , which provides emergency aid to people in need. He contacted the coast guard in Falmouth , England, using his satellite phone, and they in turn arranged for the U.S. Coast Guard to send supplies to the islanders from Honolulu, Hawaii. 

 SEE ALSO

    * Under a Jarvis Moon , a 2010 documentary film

 Lake Jocassee (/dʒəˈkæsi/ , /dʒoʊˈkæsi/ ) is a 7,500-acre (30 km2), 300-foot (91 m) deep reservoir  in northwest South Carolina . It was created in 1973 by the state in partnership with Duke Power .   The lake is known for the clean and cold Appalachian  mountain rivers that flow into it, keeping its waters cool and clear year-round. The Jocassee Dam , which forms the lake, is 385 feet (117 m) high and 1,750 feet (530 m) long. The lake is within Devils Fork State Park .
 Fork Falls toward Cashiers

 Although most manmade structures were demolished before the lake was flooded, divers recently discovered the remains of a lodge that was left intact; it is now below 300 feet (91 m) of water. Mount Carmel Baptist Church Cemetery was a setting for a scene in the film Deliverance  (1972), starring Burt Reynolds  and Jon Voight , produced before the lake was flooded. The site is now covered by 130 feet (40 m) of lake water.   
 Several waterfalls flow directly into the lake, including Laurel Fork Falls, Mill Creek Falls, Wright Fork Falls, and Moondance Falls.  

 HYDROLOGY

 Jocassee and the surrounding bodies of water.
 A confluence of four rivers supplies Lake Jocassee's water. The farthest west of the rivers, the Whitewater River , flows southeast until it meets the northwest corner of Lake Jocassee. The Thompson River flows due south until it too reaches the lake in the northwest corner. The Horsepasture River  feeds the lake from the northeast corner, along with the Toxaway River , which is directly east of the Horsepasture River.
 The Jocassee Hydro Station, located in the southeast corner of Lake Jocassee, separates it from the beginning of Lake Keowee , which has overtaken the underlying Keowee River . On the southern border of Lake Keowee is the city of Seneca , developed prior to the lake. The old mill town of Newry , constructed on the banks of the Keowee River, is now along the lake border. Unlike Lake Jocassee, Lake Keowee has become densely settled. As most of the land adjacent to Lake Jocassee is owned by Duke Power  and the State of South Carolina , they have kept it undeveloped.

 NATURAL HISTORY

 Fork State Park  portion of Lake Jocassee
 A rare wildflower, the Oconee Bell  (Shortia galacifolia), native to only a few counties in the Blue Ridge  area, was discovered in the area in 1788 by French botanist André Michaux . The flooding of a large area by Lake Jocassee is said to have caused the destruction of the heart of the species' range.  More recently, biologists have documented the occurrence of a number of rare, threatened and endangered species  in this area. The Eastatoee Gorge Heritage Preserve was transferred from Duke Power Company to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources in 1979 due to the extremely diverse flora occurring there.
 Wildlife management efforts in the Jocassee Gorges area began as early as the 1930s when the Chief Game Warden managed the stocking of trout from the Cleveland State Fish Hatchery, Table Rock State Hatchery, and the Walhalla National Fish Hatchery. The state began to investigate and improve fish populations in the area. People hiking, hunting, fishing, or nature watching benefit from the fish stocking and law enforcement of the Game Management Program (now WMA). 

 HISTORY

 Jocassee from the Bad Creek entrance to the lake.
 The name Jocassee comes from a Cherokee  legend about a maiden of that name. An Oconee  tribe, the "Brown Vipers" led by Chief Attakulla, inhabited the west side of the Whitewater River, while a rival tribe, "The Green Birds", lived on the east. Legend says that a young Green Bird warrior, Nagoochee, was not afraid to enter Brown Viper hunting grounds. On one occasion, he fell and broke his leg and was convinced he was going to die. Then he heard Jocassee, Attakulla's daughter, who brought him back to her father's lodge and nursed him back to health. Jocassee eventually fell in love with him. In a later battle, Cheochee, Jocassee's brother, killed the Green Bird warrior and brought Nagoochee's head back on his belt. Legend has it that Jocassee went into the water and did not sink but walked across the water to meet the ghost of Nagoochee. The name Jocassee means "Place of the Lost One. "
 The Jocassee Gorges area was once part of the Cherokee Nation  homelands. It now lies 300 feet (91 m) beneath the surface of the lake, near the Toxaway River . Nearby Keowee Town  was a major hub in the Cherokee Path  that connected Cherokee towns and villages throughout the area. Early 18th-century traders worked with the Cherokee, and delivered as many as 200,000 deerskins annually to Charleston, South Carolina . They supplied the local Cherokee in trade with European firearms, ammunition, metal tools, and clothing.
 However, mounting discord between the English and Cherokee led to war in 1759, during the tensions of the French and Indian War in which the English were engaged. Following the American Revolutionary War , in which rebel colonial militia repeatedly attacked Cherokee towns because of their alliance with the British, the Cherokee were forced to cede large areas of territory. In 1785, General Andrew Pickens  hosted a large gathering of Cherokee chiefs; they signed a treaty ceding all of the Jocassee gorges area, with the exception of northern Oconee County , to the United States. The Cherokee did not cede the Oconee mountains until 1815.
 Settlers from the British Isles, mostly of Scottish  and Irish  descent, came from the backcountry of Virginia  and Pennsylvania  to this area, as well as from Charleston. United States and South Carolina land grants to European Americans in the Jocassee area date to 1791.

 FISHING


 Lake Jocassee holds state records for five species  of fish, including three in the sunfish family  (Centrarchidae ). In 2001 a 5 lb 2.5 oz (2.34 kg) Redeye bass  and a 9 lb 7 oz (4.3 kg) Smallmouth bass  were caught. An 8 lb 2 oz (3.7 kg) Spotted bass  was caught in 1996. The last two came from the salmon  family (Salmonidae ). A 17 lb 9.5 oz (7.98 kg) Brown trout  was caught in 1987 and an 11 lb 5 oz (5.1 kg) Rainbow trout  was caught in 1993.


 ECONOMY


 The Jocassee Hydro Station, owned by Duke Energy , is located between Lake Jocassee and Lake Keowee ; it is a 610-megawatt, pumped storage  facility. Near the Whitewater River, Bad Creek Hydroelectric Station  is a 1,065-megawatt pumped-storage facility that started generating electricity in 1991 and is also owned by Duke.  Both facilities provide jobs for residents of the surrounding area.

 NEARBY CITIES AND TOWNS

  
 SEE ALSO

     Lakes    portal      United    States portal         portal         energy portal 
   * List of lakes in South Carolina 

 Sonkhed is a village in Loha  taluka of Nanded district  in Maharashtra  state of India .





 DEMOGRAPHY


 Sonkhed is a village with total 1100 families residing. The Sonkhed village has population of 5995 of which 3110 are males while 2885 are females as per Population Census 2011.  Average Sex Ratio of Sonkhed village is 928 which is lower than Maharashtra state average of 929.

 Schedule Caste (SC) constitutes 15.60% while Schedule Tribe (ST) were 0.53% of total population in Sonkhed village. 
 Sonkhed village has lower literacy rate compared to Maharashtra. In 2011, literacy rate of Sonkhed village was 78.08% compared to 82.34% of Maharashtra. In Sonkhed Male literacy stands at 86.13% while female literacy rate was 69.49%. 

 TRANSPORT


 It is located 22 km towards South from District headquarters Nanded . 16 km from Loha . 536 km from State capital Mumbai .
 There is no railway station in Sonkhed, nearest railway stations are Wanegaon (17 km), Limbgaon (18 km), Nanded (19 km). Nearest airport Shri Guru Gobind Singh Ji Airport, Nanded  is 22 km away.

 POLITICS


 Sonkhed comes under Nanded South  for assembly elections of Maharashtra . Current member of Maharashtra Legislative Assembly  representing Sonkhed is Hemant Sriram Patil  of Shiv Sena  since 2014.  While it comes under Nanded (Lok Sabha constituency)  for Indian general elections. Current member of parliament  representing Sonkhed is Ashok Chavan  of Indian National Congress  who is also former Chief Minister of Maharashtra .

 CULTURE


 Wednesday is the day of weekly market in Sonkhed, hundreds of people from surrounding villages comes to Sonkhed on weekly market day. Well known Maroti Temple lie in centre of market place while other temples includes temple of Sant Tukaram , Goddess Satvaai or Sataamai, Goddess Marimaai. Besides market place there is grand Mosque for Muslims while Sonkhed also have a Buddhist Vihara  which is known as Samaaj Mandir. Most of marriages of local Buddhist people takes place at this Samaaj Mandir.

 INSTITUTIONS


 Sonkhed is one of major village in Nanded district . It has Primary health centre  and Police station, both of which covers 40-60 surrounding small villages. Sonkhed have facility of education till graduation level and students from surrounding small villages come to Sonkhed for studies.

 Denotified Tribes  are the tribes in India that were listed originally under the Criminal Tribes Act  of 1871,  as Criminal Tribes and "addicted to the systematic commission of non-bailable offences." Once a tribe became "notified" as criminal, all its members were required to register with the local magistrate, failing which they would be charged with a crime under the Indian Penal Code .

 This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines . (August 2015)


 The Criminal Tribes Act was repealed in 1949 and thus 'de-notified' the tribal communities.  This Act, however, was replaced by a series of Habitual Offenders Acts , that asked police to investigate a suspect's "criminal tendencies" and whether their occupation is "conducive to settled way of life." The denotified tribes were reclassified as "habitual offenders" in 1959.
 The name "Criminal Tribes" is itself a misnomer as no definition of tribe denotes occupation, but they were identified as tribes "performing" their primary occupation. The first census was in 1871 and at that time there was no consensus nor any definition of what constitutes a "tribe". The terms "tribe " and "caste " were used interchangeably for these tribes.

 CALL FOR REPEAL


 The UN's anti-discrimination body Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination  (CERD) asked India to repeal the Habitual Offenders Act (1952) and effectively rehabilitate the denotified and nomadic tribes on 9 March 2007.


 RESERVATIONS


 In 2008, the National Commission for Denotified, Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes
 (NCDNSNT) of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  recommended equal reservations , as available to Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled Tribes , for around 110 million people belonging to the denotified tribes, nomadic  or semi-nomadic tribes in India.  Along with the tribes designated as, "Nomadic" or "Semi-Nomadic", the denotified tribes are eligible for reservation. 


 LIST OF DENOTIFIED TRIBES


 Here are a list of tribes  and castes  which were listed under Criminal Tribes Act  by British  government in India .
              
 SEE ALSO

        * Hijra (South Asia) 
 Not to be confused with Extrajudicial punishment .
 Non-judicial punishment (NJP) is a disciplinary measure  that may be applied to individual military personnel , without a need for a court martial  or similar proceedings .
 This article needs additional citations for verification . (January 2013)

 UNITED STATES


 In the United States Armed Forces , non-judicial punishment is a form of military justice  authorized by Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice .  Its rules are further elaborated on in various branch policy as well as the Manual for Courts-Martial . NJP permits commanders to administratively discipline troops without a court-martial . : V-2  Punishment can range from reprimand to reduction in rank, correctional custody, loss of pay, extra duty or restrictions depending on rank of the imposing officer and receiving officer. : V-2  The receipt of non-judicial punishment does not constitute a criminal conviction (it is equivalent to a civil action), but is often placed in the service record of the individual. The process for non-judicial punishment is governed by Part V of the Manual for Courts-Martial  and by each service branch's regulations.
 Non-judicial punishment proceedings are known by different terms among the services. In the Army  and the Air Force , non-judicial punishment is referred to as Article 15; in the Marine Corps  it is called being "NJP'd", being sent to "Office Hours", or satirically amongst the junior ranks, "Ninja Punched".  The Navy  and the Coast Guard  call non-judicial punishment captain's mast  or admiral's mast, depending on the rank of the commanding officer .

 HEARING
 Prior to imposition of NJP, the commander will notify the accused of the commander's intention to impose punishment, the nature of the misconduct alleged, supporting evidence, and a statement of the accused's rights under the UCMJ. : V-2  All service members, except those embarked or attached to a vessel currently away from its homeport, have a right to refuse NJP and request a court-martial  : V-3 . If the accused does not accept the NJP, the NJP hearing is terminated and the commander must make the decision of whether to process the service member for court-martial. If the accused accepts NJP, he or she can choose to have a hearing or waive said right. : V-3 . If a hearing proceeds, the accused may choose to be accompanied by a spokesperson. : V-3  The accused may present evidence and witnesses to the commander. The commander must consider any information offered during the hearing, and must be personally convinced that the service member committed misconduct before imposing punishment.

 PUNISHMENTS
 Maximum penalties depend on the rank  of the accused and that of the officer imposing punishment:


 FOR OFFICERS ACCUSED OF MISCONDUCT
 If the officer imposing punishment holds General Court Martial  authority, or if the commanding officer is of the grade O-7 or greater (Generals in the Army & Air Force. Admirals in the Navy, U.S. Military Rank Insignia )
       (base pay does not include allowances or special pay)   By Commanding Officers of the grades O-4 to O-6 (Majors to Colonels in the Army & Air Force. Lt. Commanders to Captains in the Navy, U.S. Military Rank Insignia )
    By Commanding Officers of the grades O-1 to O-3 (Lieutenants to Captains in the Army & Air Force. Ensigns to Lieutenants in the Navy, U.S. Military Rank Insignia )
    By Officers In Charge (OIC)
   FOR ENLISTED MEMBERS ACCUSED OF MISCONDUCT
 There are three types of non-judicial punishment commonly imposed.
 Summary Article 15: (O-3 and below) commanders and commissioned OIC may impose:
     mess hall, and medical facilities) for not more than 14 days    Company Grade (O-3 or below) commanders may impose the above plus:
     grades E-3 and below)      officer (USA/USAF E-4 and below)   Field Grade (O-4 to O-6) may impose:
        grades E-3 and below)      below); or reduction to E-1 (USA/USAF E-4 to E-2)   The punishments listed above may be combined (with certain limitations listed in the Manual for Courts-Martial, Part 5, Section 5(d)). For example, extra duties, restriction and forfeiture of pay, and reduction in grade could be imposed.
 If the member considers the punishment to be unjust or to be disproportionate to the misconduct committed, he or she may appeal the NJP to a higher authority. This is usually the next officer in the chain of command . Upon considering the appeal, the higher authority may set aside the NJP, decrease the severity of the punishment, or may deny the appeal. They may not increase the severity of the punishment. : V-1 
 Personnel are permitted to refuse NJP in favor of a court-martial; this might be done in cases where they do not feel their Commanding Officer will give them a fair hearing. : V-2  But this option exposes them to a possible criminal court conviction. Navy and Marine Corps personnel assigned to or embarked aboard ship do not have the option of refusing NJP, nor can they appeal the decision of the officer imposing punishment; they may only appeal the severity of the punishment.

 MAST


 In naval tradition, mast is the traditional location of the non-judicial hearing under which a commanding officer  studies and disposes of cases involving those in his command. In the United States Navy  and United States Coast Guard , these proceedings take place under the authority of Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice  (UCMJ ).
 If the individual conducting the proceeding is either a captain , or a lower ranking officer (typically a commander  or lieutenant commander ) serving as commanding officer  of a naval or coast guard vessel, an aviation squadron, or similar command afloat or ashore, then the proceeding is referred to as a captain's mast.
 If an admiral  is overseeing the mast, then the procedure is referred to as an admiral's mast or a flag mast.

 A captain's mast or admiral's mast is a procedure whereby the commanding officer must:
     a member of the command;      the provisions of military law  or referring the case to a    court-martial .
 A captain's mast is not:
     The term mast may also refer to when a captain or commanding officer makes him/herself available to hear concerns, complaints, or requests from the crew. Traditionally, on a naval vessel, the captain would stand at the main mast of that vessel when holding mast. The crew, who by custom did not speak with the captain, could speak to him directly at these times. It could also refer to the naval punishment of tying one to a mast and lashing them with a whip.
 S. Marines  with "meritorious mast" certificates
 In modern times, a meritorious mast refers to the commanding officer taking this time to single out a member of the crew for praise and present written recognition of work well done. 

 SEE ALSO

         * Courts-martial in the United States 
 For other uses, see Rodewald (surname) .
 Rodewald is an agricultural village in the district of Nienburg, Lower Saxony  and is locally administrated by Steimbke . At 14 km (8.7 mi) in length, Rodewald is considered the second longest village in Lower Saxony, Germany and is split into three farming communities or peasantries, known simply as; Lower, Middle and Upper Farming Community (obere, mittlere and untere Bauerschaft).


 It is situated approximately 40 km (25 mi) to the north of the federal state capital, Hanover , 125 km (78 mi) south of Germany's second largest city, Hamburg  and belonged until the administrative and territorial reforms of 1974, to the district of Neustadt am Rübenberge .

 HISTORY


 Rodewald is first mentioned in historical records during the initial quarter of the 13th century, after which the Bishop of Minden requested that the Earl of Wölpe establish a settlement. Through a systematic clearing of forests in the northern area, which is identified today as Untere Bauernschaft, the village was created and is ultimately where the name stems from; the direct English translation clear + wood, i.e. from, Low German roode 'to root' and wald 'forest'. Each settler received an equal size of land in the Hagenhufendorf  format, a typical form of High Middle Ages land ownership.
 These pitches of land, no greater than the width of the farmstead, although several hundred metres deep, were between 60 and 70 Morgen  in size (a Morgen being approximately the amount of land tillable by one man behind an ox in the morning hours of a day). This method of land ownership, typical of the High Middle Ages, can still be observed as one passes along the Landesstrasse  192 (Dorfstrasse in the north and Hauptstrasse in the south).
 In the course of the centuries the village lengthened considerably with both sides of the L192 becoming populated by the typical Fachhallenhäuser  or timber framed farmhouses, found throughout the North German Plain .
 Only after the Second World War and with the luxury of the motor car becoming available to the masses did the village begin to see buildings purely used as housing, although in order to ensure a balance between landscape and practicality two new areas in the more densely populated centre and an industrial park at the southern edge were developed. Its original charm has been retained with the open spaces along the street continuing to display the Hagenhufendorf format.

 THE FIRST AND SECOND WORLD WARS

 reduction of the Ruhr Pocket and advance to Elbe and Mulde rivers between 5 and 18 April 1945

 FIRST WORLD WAR
 During the course of the First World War Rodewald lost a number of its inhabitants after they had been drafted to serve in the army or Deutsches Reichsheer  as it was known at the time, although the area was not occupied after the cessation of hostilities.

 SECOND WORLD WAR
 11TH ARMOURED DIVISION
 During the dying days of the Second World War, the troops of the British 11th Armoured Division  carried on their steady, although strongly contested, advance across the North German Plain . Under the command of Major General George Roberts , it had 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division  to its north (later being replaced by 7th Armoured Division  after particularly heavy fighting at Rethem ), and 6th Airborne Division  to the south. Directly to its front were the troops of SS Panzer Grenadier Ausbildungs und Bataillon 12. HJ, who had been pushed back from Stolzenau during their defence of the Weser, and the sailors of 2. Marine Infanterie Division  that were now forming a defensive line along the Aller. The Division formed an essential part of General Sir Bernard Montgomery's  21st Army Group  during its crossing of the Rhine  and the subsequent race to the Baltic.
 159TH INFANTRY BRIGADE
 Having crossed the River Weser  at Petershagen, rather than the intended crossing point at Stolzenau - which was staunchly being defended by SS elements of the Hitler Youth and featured one of the last stands of the Luftwaffe, the British 159th Infantry Brigade's , forming the right hand flank of the divisional thrust, advanced along its axis of Loccum, Rehburg, Eilvese, Hagen, Dudensen, Laderholz and Rodewald. Its two battle groups were formed by combining the 2nd Fife and Forfar Yeomanry  with 1st Battalion the Herefordshire Regiment  and the 15th/19th The King's Royal Hussars  with 1st Battalion the Cheshire Regiment . Each battle group would then take it in turns to head up the advance, where they would be leapfrogged by the other battle group after any major actions, thus allowing the opportunity to establish control and to re-organise should substantial losses be experienced.
 With the objective of securing the bridge spanning the River Leine, the British 159th Infantry Brigade  fought through nearby village of Laderholz where they met stiff resistance by soldiers laid at the side of the roads and armed with Panzerfaust . On one occasion a near miss occurred where a Panzerfaust struck, but did little more than damage the vehicle's tool bin (the first three tanks not carrying infantry for obvious reasons). It responded, however, by directing one of its 77 mm  charges through the window in which the weapon was fired, killing all the occupants of the room in the process.
 divisional flash of 11th Armoured Division
 After quelling the last pockets of resistance in Laderholz, the 2nd Fife and Forfar Yeomanry/1st Battalion the Herefordshire Regiment Battle Group, had the unenviable task on 8 April 1945 of crossing the flat open country which separates the southern tip of Rodewald from Laderholz. The German defenders managed to set up concealed positions in the woods at Wiebusch, along with a road block at the south-west entrance of the village and a brief barrage of artillery and mortars were employed by the British in order to try and flush out the panzerfaust-wielding infantrymen, before A Squadron of 2nd Fife and Forfar Yeomanry could make their advance in their 35 tonne Comet  tanks with infantry soldiers of 1st Battalion the Herefordshire Regiment perched perilously on the exterior.
 With resistance remaining steady in Wiebusch, a company of the 1st Battalion the Herefordshire Regiment were to head north-east along the region of the River Alpe , where they then turned east towards the centre of the village. It soon became apparent that they would encounter no further resistance as a white flag had been affixed to the church spire of St. Aegidien by Heinrich Kahle and August Deecke, in order to prevent collateral damage occurring to an area of very little strategic or military value.
 In the meantime it was decided that C Squadron of 2nd Fife and Forfar Yeomanry and C Company from the 1st Battalion the Herefordshire Regiment, should bypass the delay at Wiebusch and make a cross-country dash from Laderholz to Mandelsloh, in an attempt to secure a crossing of the River Leine . On reaching Mandelsloh, it was found that the village was undefended and that bridging a Helstorf was not possible. They then headed north and just before nightfall, had a short sharp battle at Niedernstöcken where 70 prisoners were taken.
 By the 9th of April the remaining elements of resistance had been extinguished, or fled during the hours of darkness, and A Squadron of 2nd Fife and Forfar Yeomanry moved west along Niedernstöckener Straße and into Niedernstocken itself where they found the bridge already destroyed.
 tanks  of 15th/19th The King's Royal Hussars , 11th Armoured Division, crossing the Weser at Petershagen, Germany, 7 April 1945.
 With no viable crossing of the River Leine available to 159th Infantry Brigade, its units were forced to head south, where they bridged using 6 Airborne Division's  crossing at Neustadt am Rbge, before taking up the advance through Esperke, Grindau, Schwarmstedt, crossing the River Aller at Essel and pushing on towards Bergen-Belsen . 
 29TH ARMOURED BRIGADE
 On the 9th of April, and less than 8 kilometres to the west, the infantry of the 4th Battalion the King's Shropshire Light Infantry  and the 8th Battalion the Rifle Brigade (Prince Consort's Own)  were given the task of clearing Steimbke  of a Hitler Youth battalion which saw the soldiers of SS-Panzer Grenadier Ausbildung und Ersatz Battalion 12 'Hitlerjugend' trying to retreat to the relative safety of the wood to the north, which during their withdrawal, they were to endure a heavy mauling where many were cut down by heavy tank fire of 23rd Hussars .
 Due to their fanatical resistance, which left the village smouldering and cost some 150 German casualties, it was decided that B Squadron and Recce Troop of the 23rd Hussars, accompanied by F Company of 8th Battalion the Rifle Brigade (Prince Consort's Own)], who were position just south of Steimbke should bypass the capture of the village and advance eastwards along the Bundesstraße 214 , through Wendenborstel, Rodewald, Suderbruch, Norddrebber and press on to the bridge at Bothmer in order to secure a crossing point for 29th Armoured Brigade , who were forming the left hand thrust of 11 Armoured Division's advance through Petershagen, Loccum, Rehrburg, Schneeren, Linsburg, Stöckse and Steimbke. On their arrival at Nordrebber, the first vehicle was destroyed by Panzerfaust and heavy fighting ensued with each house having to be systematically cleared. The German troops were described as being 'fresh and full of spirit', as they tried to delay the Allied advance on the river. Unfortunately this resulted in many of the village's farmhouses being reduced to ashes. Having eventually cleared the village, a prompt stab to the north-east proved futile as the bridge was blown up in the advancing troops' faces (the bridge on the westbound exit of the B214 at Schwarmstedt  didn't exist at this point).

 By the 10th of April, 159th Infantry Brigade had advanced north on the eastern side of the Leine as far as Grindau, which allowed for the unhindered construction of bridges at Helstorf, with 29th Armoured Brigade crossing here on the 11th, before heading to Essel, via Bothmer and Schwarmstedt, which would also be left in a pitiful state after much fighting. 
 INNS OF COURT REGIMENT (THE DEVIL'S OWN)
 Employed as the Division's reconnaissance  unit, the Inns of Court Regiment  were used to liaise with 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division to the north, provide flank protection, sniff out potential bridging points and areas of high interest, such as V2 components around Nienburg area and an alleged PoW camp to the north of Steimbke. Having dispelled these rumours, they then entered the north of Rodewald at Neudorf, having arrived from Lichtenhorst, before pushing on without resistance to Gilten.
 2. MARINE INFANTERIE DIVISION
 remaining one man bunker standing adjacent to a disused hunter's cabin in the woods around Paschenburg
 The soldiers of 2. Marine Infanterie Division , commanded by Vizeadmiral Schleuren, had the unenviable title of being the last bastion of formal resistance by a coherent German formation to fight against the British Army. Its ranks consisted of Kriegsmarine , Volksgrenadier  and Hitlerjugend , who although lacking in tactics and experience, fought bravely and tenaciously, even though the War's outcome was already obvious. With very few natural obstacles to assist in defence, the Division would fall back to the region's three major rivers, where a major stand would be made until the position became unsustainable and the defending troops would withdraw during the hours of darkness in order to avoid being strafed by Allied aircraft.
 COLLATERAL DAMAGE, CIVILIAN CASUALTIES AND REFUGEES
 Although Rodewald remained largely unscathed during both the ground advances and the bombing raids of the Second World War, there are still splash marks to be found on some of the south-westerly facing walls of the buildings around the area of Krummende and shell holes are clearly visible in the woods at Wiebusch. Whether any of the houses were destroyed during the fighting is unclear, but it is fair to assume that the village was only defended at its entrance from Laderholz.
 Further information, war diaries and maps can be found by clicking here .
 AIRCRAFT LOSSES
 During the Second World War, Rodewald was never a deliberate target of Bomber Command , however, a number of losses were experienced by both the Allied and Axis powers. On 10 February 1944, a Bf 109G-6  piloted by Unteroffizier Alfred Arndt
 of V.Jagdgeschwader 11 , crashed in the region of Rodewald's Haidmühle. Although never officially identified and the grounds for the aircraft's loss never established, he was laid to rest in Rodewald's cemetery.
 Then on 8 March 1944, Leutnant Wolfgang Kiesel
 of I.Jagdgeschwader 11, died at the age of 24 when his Fw 190A-7 / R4 crashed in unknown circumstances near Wendenborstel.
 Another member of V.Jagdgeschwader 11 died on 4 April 1944, the unknown aircraft being piloted by the 23-year-old Unteroffizier Paul Tröndle , forming a part of the Reichsverteidigung . The grounds for his death are not clear and although he crashed in Rodewald, he was later buried at Wunstorf's cemetery.
 On 8 March 1944, an American B-17  named Sleepy Time Gal , was flying a bombing mission from RAF Deopham Green , Norfolk to Berlin as part of the 452nd Bomb Group , 731st Bombardment Squadron , when it was intercepted over Hanover by ten to fifteen Fw 190s , Bf 109s  and Bf 110s . Initially mistaking the distant aircraft for Allied escorts, the B-17 Flying Fortress was soon peppered by cannon fire, resulting in the loss of two of the four engines. Having ensured that his crew bailed out successfully, including the freeing of a trapped gunner, and giving away his own parachute without hesitation, the pilot, 2nd Lieutenant Theodore H MacDonald, managed to crash land the aircraft in the region of Lichtenmoor, with eight of the crew being taken as prisoners of war and two later succumbing to their injuries.
 The final loss in this area was again at Lichtenmoor when a Halifax VII  bomber named Canada Kid
 of 432 Squadron , Royal Canadian Air Force , crashed on a bombing run from RAF East Moor  to Hanover on 5 January 1945, 300 metres to the east of the road which links Steimbke and Lichtenhorst. The aircraft had just turned on the last leg of the course, south of Bremen, when a German night fighter attacked. One of the wings caught fire and the flames spread rapidly. The 27-year-old pilot, Flight Lieutenant JE Sales, was killed as a result, along with another member of the crew. They were later buried at the Hanover War Cemetery and the surviving five were held as prisoners of war.

 COAT OF ARMS

 Coat of Arms
 The coat of arms consists of an owl perched on a clerestory window aperture, surrounded by stone. The motive of the owl originates from a small stone owl which can be found in the spire Rodewald's main church, St Aegidien.
 It was approved in 1960 as a symbol of the Mittlere Bauernschaft parish by the regional president of Hanover and in 1969 adopted to represent the village as a whole.

 TRANSPORTATION



 ROAD
 The village's 2,623 inhabitants are served by two major roads, these being the Bundesstraße 214 , running east–west from Celle to Nienburg and the Landesstraße 192 , which runs north–south from Lichtenhorst to Neustadt am Rübenberge. Both are cyclist friendly and have designated cycle paths encompassing a system where motor vehicles are obliged to give way. The roads themselves are in relatively good condition, which is not necessarily the case for many of the other surrounding villages whose roads have been badly damaged by a number severe winters and remain in a poor condition due to a lack of investment (often the only viable solution being an inconvenient speed reduction from 50 to 30 km/h). To the east and south are two major motorways, the Autobahn 7  and Autobahn 2  respectively.

 TRAIN AND BUS
 Public transport is somewhat awkward should one intend to visit any of the local cities or towns, except Nienburg  where a bus service is in place. This is due to the bus service being restricted to within the confines of the district of Nienburg, serving mainly school children, students and adults without the luxury of a privately owned vehicle. The nearest train station (and taxi service) is located 10 km to the east at the town of Schwarmstedt , but due to it forming part of the district of Soltau-Fallingbostel  cannot be reached by public transport. Most of those who have access to a privately owned vehicle and intend to travel into Hanover, but aim to avoid congestion, tend to drive the 25 km south east to Bennemühlen , a town at the regional extremities of Hanover where lower train fares can be obtained. Another option is to use the Hanover bus service from Ladeholz or Niedernstöcken, which is again inconvenient for those without access to a motor vehicle.

 AIR
 Hanover International Airport  is situated to the north of the city in an area known as Langenhagen and is located besides the Autobahn 352 . Consisting of three terminals and at an approximate distance of 50 km by road, the airport is efficient not overwhelming, yet offers a good selection of destinations.

 SPORTS, LEISURE AND CULTURE



 CLUBS
 The village has an entwining sense of community spirit with most inhabitants either actively or indirectly supporting one of the many clubs in operation. At around 30 in strength, the main ones include:
 SSV RODEWALD
 The Sports and Games Club dating back to 1921 which aside fielding three football teams at district level also offers the opportunity to participate at handball, gymnastics, athletics, table tennis, Nordic walking and hiking. The Club boasts a sports hall, training football pitch and club house, and a match football pitch with a club house offering spectators food and drink.
 SCHÜTZENVEREIN
 Literally meaning Marksmen Club, there are three Schützenvereinen  within the village, one per Bauernschaft, with the members wearing a very distinctive and traditional uniform linking back to their days as a local militia. Those participating apply marksmanship principles, without attaching any military importance and compete in a purely sporting manner. The Clubs have their own Schützenhaus and hold an annual internal competition with the winner of the men's, women's and children's events being crowned during a large celebration known as Schützenfest . The weapons used tend to range from air-rifles to small bore weapons and crossbows.
 THEATERVEREIN PRECIOSA
 An amateur dramatics club provides entertainment in the form of short plays and pantomimes, often performing at Gasthaus Ernst Höper on Krummende. One of their specialities is the use of Plattdeutsch  during some presentations in an attempt to revive a local language which has been in decline since the 18th century.
 REIT UND FAHRVEREIN
 Also founded in 1921, the Riding and Carriage Club thrived until the Second World War when all but the most essential horses were commandeered for the war effort. Post war the Club again began to flourish and exists to this day. The riding hall is used for various activities including lessons in dressage, show jumping and horseback gymnastics.
 FREIWILLIGE FEUERWEHR
 Fire Station
 Although more a form of public service than a club, Rodewald has a volunteer fire brigade consisting of three active groups (one per Bauernshaft), a senior members association and a youth organisation. All active members must have attended a form of basic training and continue to develop their skills during scheduled monthly meetings where continuance training is delivered or equipment and hydrants are tested and maintained. Regional courses are also available in group leadership, the use of breathing apparatus, vehicle maintenance and radio operation.
 During an emergency the alarm is raised by the use of numerous civil defence sirens signalling that all active members within the vicinity are to make their way to the centrally located fire station and man the two fire engines and minibus where needed. As all local villages are interlinked and retain their own volunteer fire brigade, a sizable response can therefore be guaranteed when the situation requires it.
 In the near future it is envisaged that a larger fire engine will replace one of the existing vehicles, which will also involve much structural adaptation to the station itself.

 FOOD AND DRINK
 EATING OUT
 Specialising in Greek and Italian dishes, Pegasus on Neudorf offers the relaxing atmosphere of a well kept restaurant with a sizable and varied menu. Another local family business is the Big Bull take-away which is situated by the main crossroad in the centre of the village. In true German fashion it has a beer garden and is highly regarded for its Currywurst and chips.
 BARS AND PUBS
 Although different from the British pub culture, there are many bars and pubs (Kneipen und Gaststätten) which may be frequented in the same fashion in which one would a British public house. The Deutsches Haus on Hauptstraße is often the venue of live music and regularly holds Irish nights. Gasthaus Ernst Höper on Krummende is host to theatrical performances by the local amateur dramatics group and Pegasus features a sports bar in the annex. There are also numerous function rooms available for private functions and meetings.
 DISCOTHEQUES AND NIGHTLIFE
 Blaue Maus Diskothek in full swing.
 The Diskothek Blaue Maus (Blue Mouse Disco), situated on Hauptstraße, is well known throughout the region and holds the unique, but unofficial title as a farmer's disco. Theme nights are common and a combination of live and disc-jockeyed music can often be heard, as well as other forms of entertainment. The biannual Hektar Party, which takes place in spring and autumn, is usually a resounding success with local farmers donning shirts emblazoned with such details as farm type, size, siblings and tractors owned, whilst circling around ice filled buckets of Bacardi and Coke. To add volume to the venue, a large tent is often erected to form a dance hall for the live music acts and the immediate area is surrounded by fast food stalls.

 RECREATION
 FREIBAD
 open-air naturally filtered pool in high summer.
 The centrally located outdoor swimming pool is open during the weekends of summer months. It is considered eco-friendly due to the utilisation of aquatic plants and haydite, a rock to which friendly bacteria attach, acting as biological cleansers. Its own waterfall, aside providing a base for those who wish to jump into the water from a height, oxygenates the pool and acts as a return. A kiosk offers all the delights of a typical German snack bar or Schnellimbis and there are also ample other features available such as; water slides, pontoons, dedicated sun bathing area, ball games and changing facilities.

 FESTIVALS
 Throughout the year there a plethora of festivals which take place of varying scales and themes. The most notable being:
 OSTERFEUER
 The Osterfeuer, or Easter Fire, is celebrated on the Holy Saturday in the 'obere Bauernschaft' and on Easter Sunday at the Fire Station, during the hours of nightfall. Orchestrated by the local fire brigade, a large collection of small branches and twigs are heaped up on the grassed area close to the station. This allows the local inhabitants to rid their gardens of the year's tree and hedge cuttings.
 It is a family event with food and drink being available, as well as a time for the local children to meet up and play.
 SCHÜTZENFEST IN WIEBUSCH
 typical example of the street decorations during Schutzenfest.
 Schützenfest is normally a weekend affair which takes place during the weekend following Pfingsten or Pentecost as it is known in English. A marching band usually parades along the main road where they halt at each individual winner's house where various festivities steeped in tradition take place (see above for details). The event's crescendo later takes place in Wiebusch where traditional music is played, along with food and drink being served.
 JAHRMARKT IN MARKTPLATZ
 Translating as yearly market, Jahrmarkt is one of Rodewald's biggest events. Developing as a village fair where livestock and foodstuffs such as honey, saffron and pepper could be traded, it later became a place where people would ride carousels, enjoy multi-national fast food, play fairground games for prizes, listen to live music, dance and frequent many of the temporary bars which form part of the circuit. Taking place during the third weekend of September, the gathering still retains its nickname of Heiratsmarkt or marriage market due to the amount of local folk who met there and later set up in holy matrimony.
 ERNTEFEST IN WIEBUSCH
 Erntefest procession.
 Traditionally a time for local farmers to celebrate the Ernte or harvest, this three-day event is staged during the first weekend of September and involves a large tent being set up in the wooded area of Wiebusch to the south of the village. Organised by the Schützenverein, a procession consisting of various floats, tractors and trailers decorated in harvested crops, a marching band in yearly alternating fancy dress outfits and members of the Schützenverien itself, march on Saturday afternoon from Marktplaz, at the centre of the village, to Wiebusch, where they are readily replenished with liquid refreshments by spectators along the route. Local food and drink can be enjoyed whilst listening to live music, where many villagers practice the Disco-Fox  style of dancing.

 LOCAL WILDLIFE

 herd of roe deer seen grazing on agricultural land
 The surrounding area is awash with local wildlife which tends to live within the three main types of habitat available; agricultural fields, wooded areas of mixed deciduous and coniferous content, and moorland.
 In the open areas can be seen many birds of prey such as the common buzzard, kestrel, sparrow hawk and during warmer months, the red kite. Mammals which are easy to spot include; wild boar, red fox, feral cat, hare, roe deer and the slightly larger fallow deer, which tend to be more suited to the marshier areas to the north.
 Along Rodewald's stream, known as the Alpe, water birds can be commonly seen in and around the flooded fields such as the stork, heron, great egret and kingfisher.
 Hunting is common within the area with numerous elevated hides of a fixed nature being scattered around tree lines. Aside providing game meat, it also helps control the deer and wild boar populations which destroy crops, resulting in farmers viewing them as pests.
 During the fawning period of 1 April and 15 July, dogs are not allowed off their leash in open countryside with the animal liable to be shot if seen harassing game or livestock.
 Deer and wild boar prove a real risk to motorists with collisions taking place regularly. In an effort to remind motorist of the danger, pink crosses are placed on the spot of any recent accidents.

 THE STRANGLER OF LICHTENMOOR
 this spot on 27 August 1948, The Strangler of Lichtenmoor, a powerfully built male wolf, was shot by farmer Hermann Gaatz of Eilte
 The last wolf in the area was destroyed by a 61 years of age farmer named Hermann Gaatz on 27 August 1948 around the Schotenheide area between Eilte and Rodewald. It followed what had become a period of local hysteria known as Würger vom Lichtenmoor , or the Strangler of Lichtenmoor, after a number of domestic pets, cattle, sheep and wildlife had been found mutilated injuries tended to be unusually clean cuts and around the hind right quarters, which suggested a human with a knife rather than those inflicted by a predatory animal). A stone was positioned on the very spot where the animal fell, which had been found to be a 6-year-old male weighing 43 kg, with a shoulder height of 85 cm and length of 1.70 cm, who last seen stalking deer.
 The claim to fame of shooting the last wolf in the area proved short lived as in 1955 a conservationist called William Scharff shot what was in fact to be the very last one. Although no others have been seen to date, it has been suggested that the wolves are slowly returning from the east and Poland.
 ˚ redirects here. For similar symbols, see Circle symbol (disambiguation) .
 A ring diacritic  may appear above or below letters. It may be combined with some letters  of the extended Latin alphabets  in various contexts.
 This article needs additional citations for verification . (April 2020)



 RINGS



 DISTINCT LETTER
 The character Å  (å) is derived from an A  with a ring. It is a distinct letter  in the Danish , Norwegian , Swedish , Finnish , Walloon , and Chamorro  alphabets. For example, the 29-letter Swedish alphabet begins with the basic 26 Latin letters  and ends with the three letters Å , Ä , and Ö .

 OVERRING
 name "At the beehives" in Roudnice nad Labem  - Czech Republic
 The character Ů (ů) a Latin U  with overring, or kroužek  is a grapheme  in Czech  preserved for historic reasons, which identifies a vowel shift . For example, the word for "horse" used to be written kóň, which evolved, along with pronunciation, into kuoň. Ultimately, the vowel  disappeared completely, and the uo evolved into ů, modern form kůň. The letter ů now has the same pronunciation as the letter ú  (long ), but changes to a short o when a word is morphed (e.g. nom. kůň  → gen. koně, nom. dům → gen. domu), thus showing the historical evolution of the language. Ů cannot occur in initial position, while ú occurs almost exclusively in initial position or at the beginning of a word root  in a compound. These characters are used also in Steuer's Silesian alphabet . The  pronunciation has prevailed in some Moravian  dialects, as well as in Slovak , which uses the letter ô  instead of ů.
 The ring is used in some dialects of Emilian  and Romagnol  to distinguish the sound /ʌ/ (å) from /a/ (a).
 ů was used in Old Lithuanian  in Lithuania Minor  from the 16th till the beginning of the 20th century and for a shorter time in 16th-century Lithuania Major  for diphthong .
 The ring was used in the Lithuanian Cyrillic  alphabet promoted by Russian authorities in the last quarter of the 19th century with the letter У̊ / у̊  used to represent the /wɔ/ diphthong (now written uo in Lithuanian orthography).
 ẘ and ẙ are used in the ISO 233  romanization of the Arabic alphabet . A fatḥah followed by the letter ⟨ﻭ⟩ (wāw) with a sukūn (ـَوْ) is romanized as aẘ. A fatḥah followed by the letter ⟨ﻱ⟩ (yā’) with a sukūn over it (ـَيْ) is romanized as aẙ.
 Ring upon e (e̊) is used by certain dialectologists  of Walloon  (especially Jean-Jacques Gaziaux ) to note the /ə/ vowel typically replacing /i/ and /y/ in the Brabant province  central Walloon dialects. The difficulty of type-writing it has led some writers to prefer ë for the same sound.
 Many more characters can be created in Unicode  using the combining character  U+030A ◌̊ COMBINING RING ABOVE, including the above-mentioned у̊ (Cyrillic у with overring) or ń̊ (n with acute and overring).
 The standalone (spacing) symbol is U+02DA ˚ RING ABOVE. The unrelated, but nearly identical degree symbol is U+00B0 ° DEGREE SIGN.
 Although similar in appearance, it is not to be confused with the Japanese handakuten  (U+309A ◌゚ COMBINING KATAKANA-HIRAGANA SEMI-VOICED SOUND MARK), a diacritic used with the kana for syllables starting with h to indicate that they should instead be pronounced with . In Japanese dialectology, handakuten is used with kana for syllables starting with k to indicate their consonant is , with syllables starting with r to indicate their consonant is l though this does not change the pronunciation, with kana u to indicate its morph into kana n, and with kana i to indicate the vowel is to be said as .
 In Canadian Aboriginal Syllabics , there are two ring characters: ᐤ (Cree  and Ojibwe  final w, or Sayisi o) and ᣞ (Cree and Ojibwe final w or final y). This second smaller ring can combine as a diacritic ring above in Moose Cree  and Moose-Cree influenced Ojibwe as a final y; in Inuktitut , the ring above the /_i/ character turns it into a /_aai/ character. In Western Cree, /_w_w/ sequence is represented as ᐝ.
 Unicode has:
                                              
 UNDERRING
 Unicode  encodes the underring at U+0325 ◌̥ COMBINING RING BELOW
 The underring is used in IPA  to indicate voicelessness , and in Indo-European studies  or in Sanskrit  transliteration (IAST ) to indicate syllabicity  of r, l, m, n etc. (e.g. r̥ corresponding to IPA ). R with ring below, L with ring below, R with ring below and macron, and L with ring below and macron were proposed for Unicode because of their use in Sanskrit transliteration and the CSX+ Indic character set .  This proposal was rejected, because they are already encoded as sequences.

 In Pashto  romanization, ḁ is used to represent /ə/.

 Examples:
    EMILIAN
 In Emilian , e̥ can be used to represent unstressed /ə/ in very accurate transcriptions.
 ROMAGNOL
 In Romagnol , e̥ is used to represent /ə/ in diphthongs, e.g. Santarcangelo  dialect ame̥ig  'friend', ne̥ud  'naked'.

 HALF RINGS
 See also: Modifier letter left half ring  and Modifier letter right half ring 
 Half rings also exist as diacritic marks; these are characters U+0351 ◌͑ COMBINING LEFT HALF RING ABOVE and U+0357 ◌͗ COMBINING RIGHT HALF RING ABOVE. These characters are used in the Uralic Phonetic Alphabet , respectively for mediopalatal pronunciation and strong-onset vowels. These characters may be used in the International Phonetic Alphabet , denoting less and more roundedness , as alternatives to half rings below U+031C ◌̜ COMBINING LEFT HALF RING BELOW and U+0339 ◌̹ COMBINING RIGHT HALF RING BELOW. They are here given with the lowercase a: a͑ and a͗, a̜ and a̹.
 U+1E9A ẚ LATIN SMALL LETTER A WITH RIGHT HALF RING is similar in appearance but differs from a͗ because its compatibility decomposition  uses U+02BE ʾ MODIFIER LETTER RIGHT HALF RING instead of U+0357 ◌͗ COMBINING RIGHT HALF RING ABOVE.
 Other, similar signs are in use in Armenian : the U+0559 ◌ՙ ARMENIAN MODIFIER LETTER LEFT HALF RING and the U+055A ◌՚ ARMENIAN APOSTROPHE.
 Breve  and inverted breve  are also shaped like half rings, respectively, the bottom and top half of a circle.

 OTHER USES
 The ring is used in the transliteration of the Abkhaz  to represent the letter ҩ. It may also be used in place of the abbreviation symbol ॰ when transliterating the Devanagari  alphabet.

 LETTERS WITH RING

                                     
 SIMILAR MARKS


 The ring as a diacritic mark should not be confused with the dot  or U+0366 ◌ͦ COMBINING LATIN SMALL LETTER O diacritic marks, or with the degree sign °.
 The half ring as a diacritic mark should not be confused with the comma  or ogonek  diacritic marks.

 Camillo Pacetti (Rome , 2 May 1758 - Milan , 16 July 1826) was an Italian sculptor. He was the brother of Vincenzo Pacetti , another sculptor.
 Pacetti Discovery of Achilles, about 1788, modelled by Camillo Pacetti V&A Museum  no. 4938-1901
 A student of the Accademia di San Luca , he later worked in various churches in Rome and Milan. In 1804, on Antonio Canova 's recommendation, he was offered the role of chair of the Accademia di Belle Arti di Brera  in Milan, to succeed Giuseppe Franchi . Besides this teaching engagement, Pacetti accepted also public commissions, such as the statue of the New Law for the facade of the Duomo  and reliefs for the Arco della Pace  at Milan (the arch planned by Luigi Cagnola  and also featuring sculpture by Luigi Canonica ). His subject matter ranged from portraits to mythological and allegorical scenes.
 He was engaged by Josiah Wedgwood  in Rome from 1787/88 under the supervision of John Flaxman , to model six tablets illustrating the life of Achilles . A pen and wash drawing by Pacetti of Achilles on the back of Centaur hunting a Lion is in the Wedgwood Museum , Barlaston  - it is copied from a similar image on a classical marble, the Luna Disc of c. 800-400 BC in the Capitoline Museum , substituting that work's female centaur for Chiron .  He completed a Minerva for the Brera.
 Some of his notable students were Abbondio Sangiorgio  and Benedetto Cacciatori ].

 Hearts and Minds is the sixteenth album by jazz  singer Susannah McCorkle . It peaked at number 16 on the Billboard Top Jazz Albums  chart.


 This was Susannah McCorkle's last set of recordings. She died by suicide in May 2001.

 RECEPTION



 Music critic Paula Edelstein of Allmusic  praised the album and wrote McCorkle "has the remarkable capability to bring rarely heard songs back to life through updated interpretations and 21st century appeal."  The Penguin Guide to Jazz Recordings  says that the album is close to being McCorkle's masterpiece. 

 TRACKS

  1.  "I Can Dream, Can't I? " (Sammy Fain      , Irving Kahal )  2.  "Love Is Here to Stay " (George Gershwin      , Ira Gershwin )  3.  "Love, Look Away" (Richard Rodgers , Oscar Hammerstein      II )  4.  "My Attorney Bernie" (Dave Frishberg )  5.  "For All We Know " (J. Fred Coots      , Sam M. Lewis )  6.  "It Could Happen to You " (Johnny Burke      , Jimmy Van Heusen )  7.  "Haunted Heart" (Arthur Schwartz , Howard Dietz      )  8.  "What Did I Forget?" (Frishberg)  9.  "Down" (Simon Wallace , Fran Landesman )  10. "The Computer Age (In Motion)" (Thelmo Porto)  11. "Evolution" (Ivan Lins , Brock Patrick Walsh)  12. "Feet Do Your Stuff" (Simon Wallace , Fran Landesman      )  13. "Do You Miss New York?" (Frishberg)  14. "Scars" (Wallace, Landesman)  15. "I Don't Want to Set the World on Fire" (Bennie Benjamin      , Eddie Durham , Sol Marcus, Eddie      Seiler)

 PERSONNEL

         9, 12, 13, 15)     * Thiago DeMello – percussion (tracks 1, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11)

 Chloe Sophia Maxmin (born 1992) is an American Democratic  politician and environmental activist who served as the Maine State Senator  for District 13. A resident of Nobleboro , she was elected to the Maine House of Representatives  in November 2018 and to the Maine Senate  in November 2020, defeating incumbent Minority Leader  Dana Dow . Maxmin was the first Democrat ever to represent Maine House District 88, the youngest member of the 129th Maine Legislature, and is the youngest female state senator in Maine's history.





 EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION


 Maxmin was born in 1992  and grew up on a venison  farm in Nobleboro, Maine .  She attended Lincoln Academy .  Inspired by a 2005 proposal by Plum Creek Development Company to develop Moosehead Lake  in the North Maine Woods ,  she founded the Lincoln Academy Climate Action Club as a ninth grader. . Her late father Doctor Jim Maxmin was a former CEO of Volvo  
 The Climate Action Club conducted a massive reusable shopping bag campaign, established a no-idling policy on the Lincoln Academy campus, recycled 4,000 batteries and won a $5,000 national award to install solar panels at the school. In part for her work with the Climate Action Club, Maxmin was featured on the "Communities" episode during Season 3 of Big Ideas for a Small Planet  in 2009  and was one of ten national winners of the Gloria Barron Prize for Young Heroes  in 2010. 
 Maxmin graduated from Lincoln Academy in 2010 and attended Harvard University  beginning in the fall of 2011.  At Harvard, Maxmin led the Community Action Committee  and co-founded the Divest Harvard campaign focused on ending the University's endowment relationship with fossil fuel companies.  Divest Harvard began with 10 participants in 2012 and grew to almost 70,000 by 2015.

 Maxmin was named a Green Hero by Rolling Stone  , and received an annual Brower Youth Award ,  both in 2013. In 2014, the Maine Women's Fund presented her with the 2014 Samantha Smith Award for her youth activism and work toward social change.

 Maxmin graduated from Harvard University in 2015 with a degree in social studies and a minor in environmental science and public policy  and returned to Maine.


 POLITICAL CAREER



 MAINE STATE HOUSE
 In February 2018, Maxmin announced her candidacy for District 88 representative to the Maine House of Representatives .  In the Democratic primary on June 12, 2018, she defeated Alan Plummer 80%-20%. In the 2018 Maine House of Representatives general election , Maxmin defeated Republican Michael Lemelin 53%-47%, becoming the first Democrat ever to represent House District 88  and the youngest woman in the Maine State Legislature .

 Maxmin served as a member of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry in the 129th Maine Legislature .  In March 2019, she introduced the “Act to Establish a Green New Deal for Maine”, and on April 16, 2019, the Maine AFL-CIO announced its support for the bill. This was the first time a state AFL-CIO chapter has endorsed a Green New Deal proposal.  Although the final bill was significantly smaller than the original (it was pared from five sections down to two),  it passed the Maine Legislature in June 2019  and was signed into law by Governor Janet Mills  on June 17, 2019.  
 Maxmin is a graduate of the Emerge Maine  candidate training program. 

 MAINE STATE SENATE
 On January 13, 2020, Maxmin announced her candidacy for Maine State Senate  District 13. She was unopposed in the Democratic primary and received all 5,335 votes cast. In the 2020 Maine State Senate general election , Maxmin defeated incumbent Senate Minority Leader Dana Dow  51%-49%
  becoming the youngest female state senator in Maine's history. 

 Rural Runner, a short film about Maxmin's 2020 Maine State Senate race, was released in October 2020. 
 In January 2021, Maxmin was one of over 70 lawmakers to sign a letter asking the Maine Public Utilities Commission to reinstate a moratorium on power disconnections during the COVID-19 pandemic in Maine . 
 In February 2021, she was appointed by Senate president Troy Jackson  to the Maine Climate Council.

 In May 2021 she appeared on Fox News  making the claim from her book that Democrats have abandoned rural America  
 On January 12, 2022 Chloe Maxmin announced she decided not to seek re-election and would leave office on December 7, 2022.

 ELECTORAL HISTORY



 2018 MAINE HOUSE DISTRICT 88




 2020 MAINE STATE SENATE




 WORKS

     Why Our Future Depends On It, ISBN  978-080700751-8      

 Vojtěch Kloz (born January 23, 1986) is a Czech professional ice hockey  defenceman  who plays for Hungarian club DEAC of the Erste Liga . 



 CAREER


 Kloz began his career with his hometown HC Karlovy Vary  in their junior setup. He also spent time with the United States Hockey League 's Chicago Steel  before he was drafted 50th overall by the Ontario Hockey League 's Kingston Frontenacs  in the 2003 CHL Import Draft .  He played one season in the OHL before returning to Karlovy Vary, making his debut for the senior team during the 2005–06 Czech Extraliga season .
 In 2010, Kloz moved to the Tipsport Liga  in Slovakia with HK 36 Skalica . On April 30, 2012, Kloz made another return to Karlovy Vary.  After one season he moved to the Polska Hokej Liga  in Poland, signing for KH Sanok  on August 28, 2013.  On May 19, 2014, Kloz returned to Slovakia to sign with HK Nitra   but left after playing just seven games and moved onto France's Ligue Magnus  with Dauphins d'Épinal  on October 8, 2014. 
 On August 25, 2017, Kloz signed with the Coventry Blaze  of the United Kingdom's Elite Ice Hockey League   A year later, he returned to France, signing for Chamonix HC  of August 19, 2018.  On June 7, 2019, Kloz joined fellow Ligue Magnus side Anglet Hormadi Élite.
 In 2020, Kloz moved to Hungary to sign for Erste Liga  side DEAC.

 Tanimachi Yonchome Station (谷町四丁目駅, -eki) is a subway station  of the Osaka Metro  located in Chūō-ku , Osaka , Japan , and the station is also called "Tani Yon (たによん)".

 This article needs additional citations for verification . (October 2023)



 LINES

        
 LAYOUT


 There are two side platforms  with two tracks for the Tanimachi Line on the second basement, and two side platforms with two tracks for the Chūō Line over the Tanimachi Line.  Passages are located between the south of the platforms for the Tanimachi Line and the west of the platforms for the Chūō Line.
 Tanimachi Line
 1 ■ Tanimachi Line  for Tennoji and Yaominami 2 ■ Tanimachi Line  for Higashi-Umeda, Miyakojima and Dainichi
 Chūō Line
 1 ■ Chūō Line  for Morinomiya, Nagata, Ikoma and Gakken Nara-Tomigaoka 2 ■ Chūō Line  for Homachi, Bentencho, Osakako and Cosmosquare
    
 SURROUNDINGS

          
 EXTERNAL LINKS


 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tanimachi 4-chome Station .      (in Japanese)      (in English)      (in Japanese)      (in English)

 Mary Frances Vivian Lobb (1878 – 1939) was an English Land Army  volunteer and life companion to the English designer May Morris  for 22 years.



 EARLY LIFE

 Lobb was companion to May Morris who is shown in this photograph taken in 1909.
 Mary Francis Vivian Lobb was born in New Malden , Surrey in 1878. : 278  Her parents were Nicholas William Lobb and Emma Vivian Lobb, and she was the second of their five children.  Lobb grew up in Penerthwin and was educated at St. Thomas College in Launceston. 

 PERSONAL LIFE


 Lobb was a Land Girl , or Land Army volunteer, in World War I . In 1917 Lobb met May Morris, who was living at Kelmscott Manor, which had been her father William Morris' country retreat.   Morris had had two relationships with men that had failed before meeting Lobb.  Lobb moved in, initially serving as a gardener.  Lobb and Morris would spend the rest of their lives together.  Lobb was known for wearing sturdy clothes, with a Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers.  Evelyn Waugh  described Lobb as a 'hermaphrodite '  and George Bernard Shaw  also described Lobb in negative terms.  As time passed, Lobb and Morris traveled through Europe, including visits to Iceland  and Gwbert  in Wales. : 281 
 May Morris died in 1938, leaving £12,000 to Mary Lobb and tenure of Kelmscott Manor, where Lobb remained until her death the following year.  : 281 Following Morris' death some of the objects in Kelmscott Manor were auctioned off.  Lobb donated the jewellery that Morris had left to her to Victoria and Albert Museum  in London,  and gave the city of Exeter, England  her Icelandic artifacts  which included a drinking horn. 

 DEATH


 Lobb died of heart disease in 1939. : 298  Her will stipulated she was to have no coffin, only a plain oblong box.  She was cremated; her wish was for her ashes to be "scattered on a Cornish Moor preferably Bosporthennis  Manor".  She left her notebooks to the National Library of Wales  in Aberystwyth . 
 In 2017, the Kelmscott Manor Museum had an exhibit centered on Lobb.


 Emmanuelle Debever (8 August 1963 – 6 December 2023) was a French actress.





 BIOGRAPHY


 Debever made her debut in the early 1980s in the series Joëlle Mazart, a sequel to the very popular Pause café, with Véronique Jannot .
 In 1983, she landed the lead role in Un jeu brutal by Jean-Claude Brisseau , in which she starred opposite Bruno Cremer . The same year, she starred in Andrzej Wajda 's Danton  as Louison Danton, the young wife of revolutionary figure Georges Jacques Danton , played by Gérard Depardieu .  She also played a supporting role in the comedy My Other Husband , by George Lautner , with Miou-Miou , followed by the telefilm thriller Quidam alongside Richard Bohringer .
 In 1986, she appeared in an episode of the series Médecins de nuit . In 1989, she appeared in her final acting role, an episode of Les Enquêtes du commissaire Maigret.
 In June 2019, on Facebook, after learning that French prosecutors dropped their rape investigation against Gérard Depardieu , Debever accused the actor of misconduct which allegedly took place during the filming of the film Danton. 
 Debever died on 6 December 2023, at the age of 60.    Her death was first reported by Libération , which inititally reported the date as 7 December. The newspaper later issued a correction, citing Debever's sister. Debever died after a week of hospitalization following a suicide attempt in which she jumped off a bridge into the Seine .   Debever had been reported missing by her partner on 29 November after disappearing from their home and leaving a concerning note.  Her death came the day before the release of France 2's investigative news show Complément d'enquête  in which she presented her allegations against Gérard Depardieu.    Prosecutors in Paris have opened an investigation to determine the causes of her death. 

 FILMOGRAPHY



 FILM



 TELEVISION



 Irving Brinton Holley Jr. (8 February 1919 – 12 August 2013) was an American historian. He was a leading scholar in the field of American social  and intellectual history , and his particular emphasis was on military history  and the history of technology . 


 BIOGRAPHY


 A native of Torrington, Connecticut , and graduate of Wilbraham Academy , Holley attended Amherst College  and graduated in 1940 (cum laude, Phi Beta Kappa ). He then pursued graduate work at Yale University , and for his academic success in his first year received the Tew Prize as Outstanding Scholar in History. Following the attack on Pearl Harbor  in December 1941, Holley enlisted in the United States Army and became an aerial gunner, although he still received his A.M. from Yale in 1942. His doctoral work was interrupted by his military service, and he did not receive the Ph.D. from Yale until 1947.  Promoted to staff sergeant , he was an instructor at Harlingen Army Air Base  in Texas . Subsequently, he attended Officer Candidate School at Miami Beach, Florida, commissioning in April 1944, and then headed a gunnery school at Charleston Army Air Base . Following that, he was assigned for technical intelligence work at the Headquarters, Air Materiel Command, at Wright Field , Dayton, Ohio. Promoted to the rank of captain by the conclusion of the war, Holley returned to the civilian world in 1946 but remained in the reserves. From 1945 to 1947, Holley was a faculty member at the Industrial College of the Armed Forces  before taking a position at Duke University  for the remainder of his career. He would ultimately rise to the rank of major general , retiring in 1981. 
 Holley deposited genealogical material on the Holley family (1777–2008) with the Connecticut Historical Society .


 SCHOLARLY IMPACT


 Holley's scholarly work began while he was in uniform during World War II. In 1944 and 1945, he was based at Wright Field , in Dayton, Ohio. There he wrote three works analyzing research and development programs for aircraft in the Army over the preceding decades. These were "Evolution of the Liaison-Type Airplane, 1917–1944", "Development of Aircraft Gun Turrets in the Army Air Forces", and "Rotary-Wing Aircraft in the Army of Air Forces, a Study in Research and Development Policies". Holley later identified a theme that ran through these three monographs: "the pace of development for any weapon during the between-war years is chiefly determined by the extent to which its mission or operational function is known and defined." Holley saw the pace of development as slow when there was "no effective system for determining doctrine."  His subsequent work Ideas and Weapons was an outgrowth of that initial work during World War II, and was part of what Holley identified as a larger project to "distill from past experience in the development of air material those lessons which might be of help in formulating policies for exploiting the air weapons more successfully in the future" and possibly certain principles regarding weapons development.  Ideas and Weapons attempted to examine both the use of aerial weapons by the United States in World War I and the problem of weapons development more generally. Drawing on an extensive body of primary material (including records from the U.S. National Archives , the Air Force's Central Files, the Army Air Force Historical Office, and collections at different service colleges), Holley established a significant, archivally-based analysis where no effective work on the period had existed before.
 That larger research project yielded Holley's second major work, Buying Aircraft: Matériel Procurement for the Army Air Forces, published in 1964 as Special Studies volume in the official history of the United States Army in World War II series. In that volume, Holley explored procurement in a broad sense: "the computation of requirements, the evolution of internal organization, the relationship and accommodation of conflicts between executive and legislative agencies, the character and capabilities of the aircraft industry, and many other similar facets..." necessary together for a proper understanding the more basic elements of procurement, involving contracts, plant construction, and so on. 

 AWARDS AND PRIZES

      achievement given by Society for Military History     (1991)      
 BIBLIOGRAPHY

      (Praeger, 1982)      (Washington, D.C.: Army    Center for Military History, 1964, 1989)     (Carolina Academic Press, 2008)

 Preved (Russian : Преве́д) is a term used in the Padonkaffsky jargon , a meme  in the Russian-speaking Internet  which developed out of a heavily circulated picture, and consists of choosing alternative spellings for words for comic effect. The picture, a modified version of John Lurie 's watercolor  Bear Surprise , whose popularity was stoked by emails and blogs, features a man and a woman having sex in the clearing of a forest, being surprised by a bear calling "Surprise!" with its paws raised. In later Russian adaptations, the bear shouts "Preved!" (a deliberate misspelling of privet, приве́т – "hi!"). In keeping with a popular trend of image manipulation , the iconic bear — dubbed Medved ] (Russian : Медвед), a misspelling of медведь ("bear") — has been inserted into many other pictures where his appearance adds a new dimension to the joke.
 jargon used in graffiti  in the city park  of Aalst, Belgium  poster for the Russian edition of Newsweek  magazine features its chief editor Leonid Parfyonov  crying "Preved" with the Preved bears flying on the background
 The word and the bear image have found their way into the mainstream mass media, such as a poster for the Russian edition of Newsweek .
 Eventually, it has become known that the author of the altered picture with the word "preved" was user Lobzz from site Dirty.ru, real name Roman Yatsenko. The authorship of the word itself is still unclear, although the "unfinished" version, "prevet" was traced to 2003. 
 Preved is identified by a specific pattern of alternative spelling which emerged from the word. In this pattern, voiceless consonants  are replaced with their voiced counterparts, and unstressed  vowels are interchanged pair-wise – a and o stand in for each other, as do e and i. The words уча́снег (uchasneg) (a misspelling of участник (uchastnik), "user" or "participant"), preved itself, and кагдила (kagdila) (a misspelling of как дела (kak dela), "how are you") illustrate this pattern.
 The larger trend of alternative spellings, called "olbansky yazyk" ("Olbanian language ", misspelled "Albanian") developed from the padonki  movement which originated on sites such as udaff.com. That trend uses the opposite conversion from the Preved trend – voiced consonants are replaced with their voiceless counterparts (which are sometimes doubled). For vowels, o is replaced with a and e with i. For example, áвтор (ávtor, "author") would be spelled áффтар (áfftar) or áфтар (áftar). The latter exhibits a sort of eye dialect .

 "MEDVED" IN POLITICS


 In Russian, MEDVED (Russian : МЕДВЕД) is an abbreviation of the name of the Interregional Unity Movement  (Russian : Межрегиональное Движение Единство) - a pro-government movement that formed a faction in the 3rd State Duma  (1999-2002), long before the appearance of the Internet meme.  The movement's logo featured a brown bear. In 2002, the Interregional Unity Movement merged into the newly-formed United Russia  party. United Russia adopted the Unity bear logo, later changing its color from brown to white.  This, along with the Internet meme, influenced the fact that the word "medved" is often associated with Dmitry Medvedev , President of Russia from 2008 to 2012. 
 During an internet conference with Russian President Vladimir Putin  on 6 July 2006, during which all interested Runet  users asked him questions through a Yandex  portal, the question "PREVED, Vladimir Vladimirovich! How do you feel about MEDVED?" received the largest number of votes (28,424).  This event played a significant role in the "Preved-Medved" meme gaining fame and popularity even among those who rarely use the Internet.  In the end, the question was not asked to Putin (the organizers considered this and some other questions to be a flash mob ); the question "How do you feel about the Medved'  magazine?" was asked instead. Some representatives of non-Russian press took the original "Medved" question literally; in particular, Associated Press  reportedly interpreted it as a reference to then-deputy prime minister Dmitry Medvedev . 


 SEE ALSO

  * Eye dialect 

 Ricardo F. de Leon  is a Filipino retired police officer who is the current director of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency  of the Philippines .



 EDUCATION


 De Leon attended the Philippine Military Academy  (PMA), graduating from the institution in 1971 as part of the Matatag class.  He also attended the Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Maynila  where he obtained a master's degree in business administration, the Philippine Christian University  where he acquired master's degree in management, and at Bicol University  where he obtained a doctorate in peace and security studies.


 CAREER



 POLICE CAREER
 De Leon was an officer of the Philippine National Police .  After graduating from the PMA, he took the Scout Ranger Course Class 14. The unit would serve a role in the foiling of the MV Karagatan plot  of the Communist rebels in 1971. He would also escort the Marcos family  exile to Hawaii  in the aftermath of the People Power Revolution  of 1986.

 He would return to the Philippines as a lieutenant colonel , and was kept under floating status for a year until he was appointed as the director in Davao del Norte . 
 At age 44, he was promoted to a "star rank". He would served under various capacity under the PNP such as at Cavite PNP, the Central Police District  (CPD); PRO 5 and 6, staff positions at Camp Crame , director of the National Capital Region Police Office  and as head of the Philippine Center for Transnational Crimes (PCTC), and Deputy Chief of Operations.

 In 2004, de Leon was appointed as commander of the Anti-Illegal Drugs Special Operations Task Force during the administration of President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo . 
 He would retire from the Philippine police force on September 10, 2005, as PNP Deputy Chief for Administration when he reached the mandatory retirement age of 56. 

 POST-RETIREMENT
 De Leon would become president of the Mindanao State University , the first non-Mindanaoan and non-Muslim to do so upon his retirement from the police in 2005. He would also become vice president of Centro Escolar University .  From 2014 to 2022, he served as president of the Philippine Public Safety College . He was appointed to the position by then President Benigno Aquino III .  
 De Leon would be selected by then-President elect Bongbong Marcos  as director of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency  (NICA).  He would pledge to give focus on the South China Sea dispute  as well as local intelligence gathering at the barangay level, especially for the purpose of improving intelligence validation concerning the illegal drug trade in the country. 

 Nicola Laura Kaye  (born 11 February 1980) is a New Zealand politician who served as Deputy Leader of the New Zealand National Party  and Deputy Leader of the Opposition  from 22 May 2020  to 14 July 2020 .




 Kaye served as the member of the New Zealand Parliament  for the Auckland Central  electorate from 2008 until 2020. In January 2013, she was appointed to the Cabinet  by Prime Minister John Key , giving her the portfolios of Food Safety, Civil Defence , and Youth Affairs , and Associate Minister of Education and Immigration. In September 2016 she took sick leave from the House of Representatives for breast cancer  treatment  and returned to Parliament in early 2017 to resume full duties. 
 Kaye announced on 16 July 2020 she was leaving politics at the 2020 general election .

 EARLY LIFE


 Kaye was born in Auckland  and grew up in Epsom  and Kohimarama .  Kaye's parents separated when she was seven years old. Her family includes a brother and sister, "two half-brothers, four half-sisters, one stepbrother and two step-parents".
 She was educated at Victoria Avenue Primary School, Remuera Intermediate School , and Corran School  (where she was Head Prefect ), before earning a science degree  in genetics  from the University of Otago , where she also began her Bachelor of Laws , later completing it in Wellington .  

 Kaye is an accomplished competitive athlete, having been the Auckland Women's 3,000 m running champion in 1997, and has raced in numerous marathons and multi-sport events. In 2008 Kaye competed in the Coast to Coast  multi-sport event. In February 2013, Kaye completed the Coast to Coast race a second time, becoming the first New Zealand Cabinet  Minister to do so.[citation needed ]
 In 1997, Kaye participated in a television documentary called Fish out of Water, in which she and five other teenagers were marooned on Rakitu Island (off Great Barrier Island ) and fended for themselves for eight days.  The documentary footage was located in March 2014 and was published on New Zealand on Air's on-line archive NZ On Screen  as part of its "before they were famous" series.

 Kaye joined the National Party in 1998, becoming women's vice-chair of the southern region of the New Zealand Young Nationals . She is a former International Vice-Chairman of the International Young Democrat Union . 
 Kaye began working for Bill English  in the office of the Leader of the Opposition  in 2002 as a policy  researcher. In 2003 she travelled to the United Kingdom , where she worked as a policy officer and project manager at the London boroughs  of Enfield  and Bromley , and then at Transport for London , where she managed a disabled people transport program, before working as an IT  project manager  at the Halifax Bank of Scotland . 
 In 2006, Kaye co-founded a website, networkme.com, and acts as Director of Communications for that company.]

 MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT



 Kaye returned to New Zealand in late 2007 to contest the National Party candidacy for the Auckland Central electorate . Standing against three other nominees, Kaye was considered[by whom? ] an outsider in a close selection battle against sitting list MP Jackie Blue  for the nomination. 
 Kaye worked full-time as the National Party candidate from the time of her selection. She campaigned on improving public transport  infrastructure, improving marine protection around Great Barrier Island , and taking a greater interest in small businesses in Auckland. During her campaign she knocked on 10,000 doors.

 At the general election on 8 November 2008 , Kaye was elected as National's MP for Auckland Central, defeating incumbent Labour  MP Judith Tizard . This was greeted[by whom? ] as one of the most significant upsets of the 2008 general election , breaking a 90-year hold by left-wing  parties over the seat; Kaye became the first ever National MP for the electorate.]

 FIRST TERM
 As an MP, Kaye has, amongst other things, supported applications for the New Zealand Cycle Trail  fund for routes in urban Auckland , on Waiheke Island  and Great Barrier Island  (the latter two islands being in her electorate as well).  In early 2010, she broke with the National Party's policy of encouraging mining in conservation land, including on Great Barrier – claiming long connections to the island, and fitting in with her known support for environmental causes. She had noted during her maiden speech in parliament that "Our environment is the greatest gift we have been given as a nation", and that economical considerations, especially of the short term, should not trump this.  Kaye is a supporter of reinstating trams for Auckland , and has called for a feasibility study into extending the new Wynyard Loop. 
 She holds up former National MP Katherine Rich  as one of her role models.  Kaye's own policies, placing her in the socially liberal wing of the National Party,  have been criticised by some people in her own party, where some have called her a "high maintenance backbencher ". Others have called her "obsessive", or, in a more positive vein, "driven".  However, commentators have argued that her stance is unlikely to hurt her in her marginal electorate, which has traditionally voted Labour. 
 Kaye was elected the deputy chair of the Government Administration Select Committee in February 2011. In her first parliamentary term, she also sat on the Local Government and Environment Select Committee and the Auckland Governance Legislation Select Committee. Through her time in Parliament on these committees she has been heavily involved in the review of the Resource Management (Simplifying and Streamlining) Amendment Bill and legislation creating the Auckland Council . 
 In May 2011, Kaye appeared in an episode of the TVNZ  series Make the Politician Work. The episode featured Kaye working a shift on a rubbish collection route and highlighted her campaign for waste minimisation in Auckland. 
 At the 2011 election , Kaye stood again in Auckland Central in a high-profile race to retain the seat. She was challenged for the seat by Labour list MP Jacinda Ardern  and Green  candidate Denise Roche , and was placed at position 33 on the National Party list. She defeated Ardern, although her majority was halved to 717, her share of the vote increased to 45.39%, due to significant strategic voting by Green Party voters supporting Ardern for the electorate vote. 

 SECOND TERM
 Following the 2011 election, Kaye was elected Chair of Parliament's Education and Science Select Committee. During this time, despite a minority of Government members on the Committee, she managed to progress a significant number of inquiries and pieces of legislation through the House process.  At the end of 2012 the Education and Science Select Committee completed an inquiry into 21st Century Learning Environments and Digital Literacy, which Kaye championed. 
 Kaye was instrumental in bringing a gay pride event back to Auckland,  where there is a significant LGBT  community in her electorate. In 2012 she worked with Green MP Kevin Hague on a private member's bill  to reform adoption and surrogacy laws, which was introduced to Parliament that year.  In August 2012, Kaye successfully led the campaign within the National Party to retain the alcohol purchase age at 18, despite significant support from parliamentary colleagues to raise the purchase age.

 On 29 August 2012 Kaye delivered a speech at Parliament in favour of Louisa Wall 's Marriage (Definition of Marriage) Amendment Act 2013 , which she voted for through all stages. This was met with positive reception from members of the LGBT community.]

 THIRD TERM AND PROMOTION TO CABINET MINISTER
 at her swearing-in as a Cabinet Minister, 2013
 On 22 January 2013 Kaye was appointed by Prime Minister John Key to the Cabinet of New Zealand   and was appointed as Minister for Food Safety, Minister of Civil Defence  and Minister of Youth Affairs , along with being made the Associate Minister of Education and Associate Minister of Immigration.  
 After the 2014 general election , Kaye was appointed Minister for ACC,  while retaining her other portfolios, except Food Safety and Associate Immigration.  In 2016 she took leave from Parliament and her ministerial duties while being treated for breast cancer.  She returned to Parliament in early 2017 to resume full duties. 
 In the 2017 election  Kaye retained the Auckland Central electorate in the 2017 election, but National became an opposition party.

 NATIONAL PARTY DEPUTY LEADER
 Main article: May 2020 New Zealand National Party leadership election

 In May 2020, there was a challenge to the National Party leadership , where Todd Muller  sought to replace Simon Bridges  as leader of the National Party. The media reported days ahead of the vote that Kaye was understood to be Muller's running mate and was seeking to become the party's deputy leader, but she refused to confirm if she would stand, with news articles referring to her as the "presumed" candidate even hours before the vote.    On 22 May 2020 the party parliamentary caucus elected both Muller as leader and Kaye as deputy leader.

 On 25 May 2020, she incorrectly described Paul Goldsmith  as Māori  when defending the diversity of Muller's Shadow Cabinet. 

 On 2 July 2020, Kaye assumed the Women's portfolio within Todd Muller's shadow cabinet  after former Deputy Leader Paula Bennett  announced that she would not be contesting the 2020 New Zealand general election .  
 Following Todd Muller's resignation as National Party leader, Kaye became acting (interim ) leader for several hours.  Later that day, Judith Collins  was elected to succeed Muller, and Gerry Brownlee  replaced Kaye. 
 Kaye announced that she was leaving politics two days later. Her resignation took effect at the October 2020 general election . 

 The Cayman Islands  competed at the 2015 Pan American Games  in Toronto , Ontario , Canada from July 10 to 26, 2015.  For the first time ever the country had a national house at a multi-sport event . The offices of FUSE Marketing Group, in Downtown Toronto  served as the location of the house.



 Swimmer Brett Fraser  was the flagbearer for the team during the opening ceremony .


 COMPETITORS


 The following table lists Cayman Island's delegation per sport and gender.



 ATHLETICS

 Main articles: Athletics at the 2015 Pan American Games  and Athletics at the 2015 Pan American Games – Qualification

 The Cayman Islands qualified two athletes. Originally the country had qualified more athletes including a 4x100 metres relay team. However organizers had to reduce the quota in athletics as too many athletes had qualified.

 Key    Men Track


 BEACH VOLLEYBALL

 Main articles: Beach volleyball at the 2015 Pan American Games  and Beach volleyball at the 2015 Pan American Games – Qualification

 The Cayman Islands qualified a women's pair.




 GYMNASTICS

 Main articles: Gymnastics at the 2015 Pan American Games  and Gymnastics at the 2015 Pan American Games – Qualification

 The Cayman Islands qualified one female gymnast.  This will be the first time ever the country has competed in the sport at the Pan American Games .
 Artistic Women

 Qualification Legend: R = Qualified to apparatus final since two athletes per country can qualify for finals and United States and Brazil had reached the maximum number of athletes qualified into the finals.

 SWIMMING

 Main articles: Swimming at the 2015 Pan American Games  and Swimming at the 2015 Pan American Games – Qualification

 The Cayman Islands qualified two swimmers (one male and one female).

 Key    


 SEE ALSO

     

 In eight-dimensional geometry , a truncated 8-orthoplex is a convex uniform 8-polytope , being a truncation  of the regular 8-orthoplex .


 There are 7 truncation for the 8-orthoplex. Vertices of the truncation 8-orthoplex are located as pairs on the edge of the 8-orthoplex. Vertices of the bitruncated 8-orthoplex are located on the triangular faces of the 8-orthoplex. Vertices of the tritruncated 7-orthoplex are located inside the tetrahedral  cells of the 8-orthoplex. The final truncations are best expressed relative to the 8-cube.




 TRUNCATED 8-ORTHOPLEX


 Truncated 8-orthoplex Typeuniform 8-polytope  Schläfli symbol t0,1{3,3,3,3,3,3,4} Coxeter-Dynkin diagrams




 6-faces 5-faces 4-faces Cells Faces Edges1456 Vertices224 Vertex figure ( )v{3,3,3,4} Coxeter groups B8,
 D8,  Propertiesconvex 

 ALTERNATE NAMES
     

 CONSTRUCTION
 There are two Coxeter groups  associated with the truncated 8-orthoplex, one with the C8 or  Coxeter group, and a lower symmetry with the D8 or  Coxeter group.

 COORDINATES
 Cartesian coordinates  for the vertices of a truncated 8-orthoplex, centered at the origin, are all 224 vertices are sign (4) and coordinate (56) permutations  of
 (±2,±1,0,0,0,0,0,0)

 IMAGES



 BITRUNCATED 8-ORTHOPLEX




 ALTERNATE NAMES
     

 COORDINATES
 Cartesian coordinates  for the vertices of a bitruncated 8-orthoplex, centered at the origin, are all sign and coordinate permutations  of
 (±2,±2,±1,0,0,0,0,0)

 IMAGES



 TRITRUNCATED 8-ORTHOPLEX




 ALTERNATE NAMES
     

 COORDINATES
 Cartesian coordinates  for the vertices of a bitruncated 8-orthoplex, centered at the origin, are all sign and coordinate permutations  of
 (±2,±2,±2,±1,0,0,0,0)

 IMAGES



 Cindy Chao (Chinese : 趙心綺) is a Taiwanese jewellery designer. She founded her company, Cindy Chao The Art Jewel, in 2004. She is known for her Black Label Masterpiece Collection and Annual Butterfly.





 EARLY LIFE


 Chao was born in Taiwan  in the 1970s. She is the daughter of a sculptor and a businesswoman. Her grandfather Hsieh Tzu-Nan (simplified Chinese : 谢自南; traditional Chinese : 謝自南; pinyin : Xiè Zìnán) was an architect who designed temples across Taiwan.   According to Chao, it was her grandfather who inspired her interest in architecture.

 CAREER


 Chao learned various techniques and skills of sculpting from her father, which eventually shaped her own style of design.  In 2004, Chao established Cindy Chao The Art Jewel and opened its first showroom in Taipei.  In 2007, she became the first Taiwanese jewellery artist to take part in a Christie's  New York fine jewellery auction.] Her pieces feature classic 18th century artisan techniques of crafting designs in wax known as la cire perdue (Lost-wax casting ). Chaos's pieces are completed using precious metal and gemstones.
 Chao's two collections, Black Label Masterpieces and White Label Collection, have been exhibited at art fairs and institutions around the world including Beijing Today Art Museum, Tokyo Mori Art Museum,  Biennale des Antiquaires in Paris,  Masterpiece London,     and TEFAF Maastricht.   In 2010, Cindy Chao become one of the first Taiwanese jewellery artists to have one of her designs, an Annual Butterfly, inducted into the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History.     
 In 2020, her first annual butterfly brooch the 2008 Black Label Masterpiece I, Ruby Butterfly Brooch, was donated to the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris , displayed in its Galerie des Bijoux.




 In 2021, her 2018 Black Label Masterpiece XVIII “Peony Brooch” was inducted into the William and Judith Bollinger Gallery of the Victoria and Albert Museum .




 On 17 November 2021, Cindy Chao was appointed Chevalier dans l’Ordre des Arts et Lettres (Order of the Arts and the Letters) by France's minister of culture Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin during a ceremony held in Paris, France.  


 JEWELLERY



 BLACK LABEL MASTERPIECES
 The Black Label Masterpieces are inspired by Chao's passion for architecture, sculpture, travel, and nature. The limited-edition jewels are created annually, and each piece is named, numbered, and dated. 
 The 2018 Black Label Masterpiece XVIII “Peony Brooch” by Cindy Chao The Art Jewel was inducted into the William and Judith Bollinger Gallery of the Victoria and Albert Museum .


  Cindy Chao was commissioned to transform a ruby necklace and chose to create a peony, an imperial flower, which in Chinese tradition would bring good fortune. The gestation of the brooch took place over eleven years.  The Peony Brooch is made in titanium   and set with 105 oval-cut rubies and dusted with a further 2,380 rubies and 668 diamonds.


 ANNUAL BUTTERFLIES
 Every year Chao creates one butterfly piece.  The first butterfly was created in 2008 and has since been coined as the Annual Butterflies. Each butterfly takes more than 18 months to complete as gemstones and thousands of pavé-set diamonds are set on and around delicately molded wings.]
 The 2009 Black Label Masterpiece I, Royal Butterfly Brooch, was donated to the Smithsonian Institution National Museum of Natural History's  gem collection.   The Royal Butterfly is composed of 2,328 gems, totaling 77 carats .  The centerpieces of the butterfly's wings contain four large faceted diamond slices stacked atop a pave layer of faceted diamonds, creating a pattern resembling a living butterfly's wings.
 The 2014 Black Label Masterpiece I, Ballerina Butterfly, was designed in collaboration with Sarah Jessica Parker .

 The 2008 Black Label Masterpiece I, Ruby Butterfly Brooch, was donated to the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris , displayed in its Galerie des Bijoux. 

  It is the first butterfly brooch created by Cindy Chao and it is made of 18K gold, encrusted with two Burmese rubies totaling almost 13 carats  and are surrounded by more than 1,000 diamonds. There are 82 sapphires in the other side totaling almost 2 carats . 

 The Hoofers Club was an African-American  entertainment establishment and dancers' club hangout in Harlem , New York , that ran from the early 1920s until the early 1940s. It was founded and managed by Lonnie Hicks (1882–1953), an Atlanta -born ragtime pianist. 


 HISTORY


 The Hoofers Club was a legendary site of some of the best of jazz  and tap performers, particularly in the 1920s and 1930s. It was located on Harlem's "Swing Street," the stretch of 133rd Street  between Lenox  and Seventh Avenues  known for its music and dance venues.
 The Hoofers Club was actually a small room in the back of a comedy club.

 > When you walked down the stairs of the Hoofers Club ... you would go into a > little room. The room was no bigger than 30x20 feet. It had a piano in the > corner and a good floor. All the dancers around town came in. You could hear > dancing the minute you got in the building. There was always dancin' going on, > known dancers and unknown dancers. 
 Among the tap dancers who appeared at the club were Bill Robinson ,  Jack Wiggins , Maceo Anderson ,  "Buddy" Bradley ,  John Bubbles ,  Honi Coles ,  Eddie Rector ,  Leonard Reed ,  Dewey Washington,  Raymond Winfield ,  Roland Holder ,  Hal Leroy  (one of the only White dancers ever invited in),  Harold Mablin,  "Sandman" Sims , "Slappy" Wallace,  Warren Berry, "Baby" Laurence Jackson ,  Buster Brown , and other black tap dancing greats.


 > At the Hoofers Club, rookie and veteran, mostly lack male tap dancers > assembled to share with, steal from, and challenge each other; there, new > standards were set for competition. These were nothing like the formalized > buck-dancing  competitions of Tammany Hall, where judges sat > beside, before, and beneath the stage to evaluate the  clarity, > speed, and presentation. The Hoofers Club comprised a more informal panel of > peers, whose judgments could be cruel and mocking and were driven by an > insistence on innovation. "Survive or die" was the credo. In an eccentric > fusion of imitation and innovation, young dancers were forced to find their > style and rhythmic voice. It was said that on the wall of the Hoofers Club was > written: "Thou shalt not copy each other's steps — Exactly." > 

 IN POPULAR CULTURE


 A fictionalized version of the Hoofers Club was depicted in Francis Ford Coppola 's 1984 film The Cotton Club . The "Tree of Hope ," a piece of which is still touched by performers for good luck on the stage of the Apollo Theater , originally stood outside the Hoofers Club and the nearby Lafayette Theatre .

 For the unrelated former radio station in Cambridge, Ontario, see CJDV-FM .
 CIAM-FM is a community  Christian radio  station  broadcasting at 92.7 MHz  on the FM dial  in Fort Vermilion, Alberta , Canada. CIAM-FM is a listener supported community broadcast. CIAM Media & Radio Broadcasting Association is the registered charity that holds the broadcast license.


 CIAM-FM carries music programming, community events, national & international news, sports, weather and syndicated spoken word content. Some content is in local ethnic languages including Cree, Dene, and Plaudt Deutsch .

 HISTORY


 The station in Fort Vermilion began broadcasting in January 2003 at 92.3 MHz on the FM dial  but moved to 92.7 FM around 2004.  
 CIAM-FM has many rebroadcast transmitters in Alberta , British Columbia , Saskatchewan  and the Northwest Territories .

 REBROADCASTERS




 On May 16, 2008, CIAM has applied to the CRTC  to add a transmitter at Buckland, Saskatchewan and another at Vanderhoof, British Columbia       Also on July 15, 2008 the station applied to add more rebroadcasters to a number of communities in Alberta and received approval on November 6, 2008. 
 On March 13, 2009, an application received by CIAM Media & Radio Broadcasting Association proposes to amend the technical parameters of its transmitter, CIAM-FM-11 Vanderhoof, British Columbia, by changing the frequency from 97.9 MHz to 98.5 MHz.  This frequency change was approved on May 12, 2009. 
 On April 22, 2010, CIAM-FM applied to add more transmitters in these following locations: 89.5 MHz Three Hills, Alberta , 105.5 MHz Prespatou, British Columbia  and 107.5 MHz in Dawson Creek, British Columbia . This application was denied by the CRTC on August 20, 2010.  On March 17, 2011, the station reapplied to add new transmitters in Three Hills, Alberta, Prespatou, British Columbia and Dawson Creek, British Columbia. All three of these locations were approved by the CRTC on July 28, 2011.  
 On October 25, 2011, the CRTC approved an application by CIAM-FM Media & Radio Broadcasting Association to change the authorized contours of its transmitter CIAM-FM-12 Cleardale, Alberta by decreasing the antenna's effective height above average terrain from 48.5 to 39.07 metres and relocating the transmitter site. 
 On August 9, 2012, CIAM received approval from the CRTC to add a transmitter at Prince Albert, Saskatchewan . The new Prince Albert transmitter will operate at 107.1 MHz on the FM band.

 On June 8, 2016, the CRTC approved CIAM Media & Radio Broadcasting Association's application to operate a low-power rebroadcasting transmitter in Taber, Alberta  which will operate at 89.3 MHz (channel 207LP) with an effective radiated power of 50 watts (non-directional antenna with an effective height of antenna above average terrain of 25.85 metres).  Its unknown if or when the Taber transmitter signed on at 89.5 MHz instead of 89.3 MHz. On May 25, 2019, CIAM received CRTC approval to change frequencies for CIAM-FM-23 in Taber, Alberta from 89.5 MHz to 102.5 MHz. Power would increase from 50 to 1,500 watts. EHAAT would rise from 41.3 to 46.2 metres.  
 On September 19, 2017, CIAM Media & Radio Broadcasting Association received CRTC approval to add rebroadcast FM transmitters at Burnt Hills, Alberta (101.9 MHz with ERP of 50 watts and EHAAT of 82.99 metres), Saskatoon Hill, Alberta (89.3 MHz with an ERP of 50 watts and EHAAT of 156.3 metres), Rose Prairie, British Columbia (107.5 MHz with ERP of 50 watts and EHAAT of 104.6 metres), and Boston Bar, British Columbia (91.1 MHz with ERP of 50 watts and EHAAT of -537.2 metres).  
 On October 4, 2018, the CRTC approved CIAM’s applications to add FM transmitters at Telegraph Creek, British Columbia on 92.7 MHz with ERP of 50 watts and Corman Park, Saskatchewan on 102.9 MHz with ERP of 50 watts. 

 On April 15, 2019, CIAM received CRTC approval to add a new FM transmitter in Fort Liard, Northwest Territories that would operate on 95.1 MHz with 50 watts.  
 For other ships with the same name, see French ship Souverain .
 Souverain was an Océan type 118-gun ship of the line  of the French Navy . She was launched in 1819 and transformed into a steam ship in 1853.




 SERVICE HISTORY


 Launched in 1819, Souverain was not commissioned before 16 April 1840. She then became the flagship of the Second Division of the Mediterranean Squadron, under the Captain Jouglas from 1841, and later under Captain Daguenet from 1842.

 In 1842, the squadron patrolled the coast of Italy; a notable alumni of the cruise was then-Ensign Jean-Bernard Jauréguiberry .

 Decommissioned after the cruise, Souverain was reactivated on 1 April 1846 to serve as the flagship of Joinville 's escadre d’évolutions, with Captain Charner as flag officer . In July 1847, the squadron sailed to Tripoli on a background of tensions between France, Tripoli and Tunis.

 In 1848, Admiral Charles Baudin  relieved Joinville as head of the squadron. Baudin set his mark on Friedland , while Souverain, under Captain Le Barbier de Titian, remained as one of the strongest units of the squadron. She served off Italy, before returning to Toulon and being decommissioned on 18 November 1848.

 From November 1853, engineer Sylvestre du Perron directed work on Souverain to add a 600-shp steam engine, after plans by Dupuy de Lôme , without lengthening the ship;  Souverain started her new trials in June 1857, under Commander de Jouslard. In her new configuration, she still carried 110 guns. In 1862, she was reconfigured as a troopship for the Second French intervention in Mexico , with only 16 30-pounder long guns , under Captain Sévin. Souverain was listed in the reserve between 1863 and November 1866, when she took part in the French retreat from Mexico, under Captain Leblanc.

 In February 1877, Souverain was recommissioned as a gunnery school, with a particular artillery and configuration to train gunners, comprising. She was under Captain Lefort from 1877 to 1878; Massias-Jurien de la Gravière from 1879 to 1880; Captain de Labarrière from 1881 to 1882; Alquier from 1883 to 1884; and Augey Dufresse in 1885. At this point, Couronne  replaced her as school-ship for gunnery training, and she became a pontoon used as barracks for the Infanterie coloniale   in Toulon.

 Souverain in toulon as barracks hulk     Souverain was eventually sold for scrap and broken up in 1905.


 Wikimedia Commons has media related to French ship Souverain (1819) .
 This article is about the medical school in Winston-Salem, NC. For the unaffiliated healthcare system based in Raleigh, NC, see WakeMed .
 Wake Forest University School of Medicine is the medical school  of Wake Forest University , with two campuses located in Winston-Salem, North Carolina  and Charlotte, North Carolina , United States. It is affiliated with Atrium Health Wake Forest Baptist , the academic medical center whose clinical arm is Atrium Health Wake Forest Baptist. In 2021, U.S. News & World Report ranked Wake Forest School of Medicine 48th best for research in the nation and 80th best for primary care.  The School of Medicine also ranks in the top third of U.S. medical schools in funding from the National Institutes of Health  (NIH).




 WINSTON-SALEM CAMPUS



 HISTORY AND BACKGROUND
 of Bowman Gray (now relocated) at the former entrance to the School of Medicine
 In 1902, the two-year Wake Forest College Medical School was founded on the college campus in Wake Forest, North Carolina. Thirteen students made up the charter medical class. Tuition was $37.50 per term; additional fees were charged for laboratories and student health care.

 The Southern Baptist denomination in 1919 began its first planning for a hospital directed primarily at the care of the poor. Applications were received from Raleigh, High Point, Charlotte, Greensboro, Salisbury and Winston-Salem. The Southern Baptists chose Winston-Salem, and an 88-bed hospital opened there in 1923.
 In the wake of a 1935 Carnegie Foundation report suggesting the dissolution of two-year medical schools, those schools began to consider alternatives. Meanwhile, the death of Bowman Gray , the president of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. in Winston-Salem, also in 1935, led his family to consider how to best make use of $750,000 that he left to be put toward a community cause. The Gray family decided to offer the money to a medical school willing to relocate to Winston-Salem. After the University of North Carolina rejected a chance to obtain the money because it did not want to leave Chapel Hill, Wake Forest's medical school dean, Coy Cornelius Carpenter , in 1939 helped to forge a deal for the funds. In 1941, Bowman Gray School of Medicine opened on the campus of N.C. Baptist Hospital with 75 students, including 45 freshmen and 30 sophomores.
 The rest of Wake Forest University would follow the medical school to Winston-Salem in 1956, in an effort led by the family of R.J. Reynolds . 
 The school became known for its innovative curriculum and prominent faculty members, including:]
     escape fascism, and who, at Wake Forest, worked with lipids in research on    atherosclerosis, among other subjects.     director of the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness. He    encouraged faculty to pursue research grants, which helped the school in its    push toward research and growth as an academic medical center.     in 1962 and who wrote a widely used text, Cerebrovascular Disorders.
 A flurry of building projects beginning in the late 1950s and continuing today began a period of expansion that continues today. More than $700 million was spent on new buildings and equipment for the School of Medicine and medical center campus in the 1990s and 2000s. In 1997, the school was renamed Wake Forest University School of Medicine, and the medical school campus became the Bowman Gray Campus. 
 On April 7, 2000, developer David Shannon announced plans for a three-story building in Piedmont Triad Research Park  in downtown Winston-Salem which would house the medical school's physician assistant  program. This would be the school's second department downtown; the Department of Physiology and Pharmacology had already moved into the research park's first building, Piedmont Triad Community Research Center. 
 In 2011, the school's name would be changed slightly again, to Wake Forest School of Medicine, as a part of a restructuring that also renamed the institution's clinical component as Wake Forest Baptist Health.

 The School of Medicine's strong research focus is evident in its translational work, which raised about $345.5 million in licensing revenues from 2010-2014. The newer buildings and facilities that are a focus of research for students and faculty are Ardmore Tower, which is home to Brenner Children's Hospital, the J. Paul Sticht Center on Aging and Rehabilitation, the Comprehensive Cancer Center and Wake Forest Innovation Quarter. The latter is a 200-acre, mixed-used center in downtown Winston-Salem focusing on the biomedical and material sciences and information technology fields. Tenants at the Innovation Quarter include the Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine (WFIRM), which was established in 2004 and has risen to national prominence. WFIRM's scientists are working to engineer more than 30 different replacement tissues and organs and to develop healing cell therapies—all with the goal to cure, rather than merely treat, disease. 
 learning classroom at Wake Forest School of Medicine Forest School of Medicine - Bowman Gray Center for Medical Education
 In July 2016, the School of Medicine opened the Bowman Gray Center for Medical Education, a $50 million, state-of-the-art building in downtown Winston-Salem's Innovation Quarter . The new campus occupies 168,000 square feet in a former R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company  plant next to Wake Forest Biotech Place, with half the cost being paid for by historic tax credits.



 ADMISSIONS AND RANKINGS
 For the entering class of 2021, 10,703 students applied for admission, 504 were interviewed, and 326 were accepted for 145 spots giving rise to a 3% acceptance rate. [failed verification ]]

 ACADEMICS AND CURRICULUM
 The School of Medicine is a member of the Association of American Medical Colleges  (AAMC) and is accredited by the Liaison Committee on Medical Education (LCME), which is jointly sponsored by the Council on Medical Education of the American Medical Association  (AMA) and the AAMC.
 In 2017, the 'Wake Ready!' curriculum was implemented changing the focus from the traditional 2 preclinical + 2 clinical years of curriculum to three phases. During the first phase, Foundations, which is 18 months in length, basic science  courses are integrated with both clinical and patient care organized by systems. Additionally, students learn about bedside clinical skills, bioethics and population health. The second phase, Immersion, is 12 months in length, allows students to rotate through a series of required clerkships  in which the students are members of the medical team learning to treat patients in a hospital setting. Students complete 8 weeks of internal medicine, 7 weeks of surgery, 6 weeks of pediatrics, 2 weeks of ambulatory internal medicine, 7 weeks of obstetrics/gynecology & women's health, 4 weeks of family medicine, 4 weeks of psychiatry, 4 weeks of neurology, and 2 weeks of anesthesiology during this time. Additionally, radiology and basic clinical procedures are integrated longitudinally. The last phase, Individualization, is 14 months in length and allows for students to choose their rotations based on their interests and future career plans, including time for research or away rotations at other institutions. Students also have the opportunity to do electives in foreign countries and gain exposure to the differences in care in other countries.

 Students do clinical and research work primarily with Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, Wake Forest Baptist Health—Brenner Children's Hospital, W.G. Hefner Salisbury Veterans Affairs Medical Center and the Virginia Tech-Wake Forest School of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences.

 JOINT DEGREE PROGRAMS
 The School of Medicine offers, in conjunction with Wake Forest University's Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, a joint M.Ddegree from the M.DProgram  It also offers a joint M.Ddegree in bioethics.
 The joint Ph.Dprogram was established in 1999 by the Wake Forest University Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and the Schools of Business, with the goal of providing Ph.D. scientists with the opportunity to obtain advanced business training and internship opportunities.
 Finally, there is an M.Doffered in Clinical and Population Translational Sciences through Wake Forest University's Department of Public Health Sciences. 

 INSTITUTES AND CENTERS
 Physicians, scientists and students at Wake Forest School of Medicine often work in the research- or education-based institutes and centers affiliated with the school. These include:
 Institutes and research-based centers
                                                                            
 Education and training-based centers
               
 Innovation-based centers
      

 STUDENT LIFE
 Students participate in a number of volunteer and common-interest organizations. Delivering Equal Access to Care (DEAC) is a student-run clinic serving uninsured, low-income residents of Winston-Salem.  Oasis is an online magazine that publishes student artistic and literary works.  Other student organizations include interest groups that correspond with particular specialties and Wake Forest chapters of the American Medical Association, Student National Medical Association  and Operation Smile . Many students also are active in intramural sports  organized through the university.
 A significant number of students also participate in research, and the Medical Student Research Program funds student research projects during the summer between their first and second years.  The School of Medicine also participates in the Albert Schweitzer Fellowship program , with a number of students winning fellowships each year. 

 NOTABLE FACULTY AND ALUMNI
 Atala , M.D. Marshburn , M.D. See also: List of Wake Forest University people
                  disease    


 CHARLOTTE CAMPUS


 Charlotte is currently the largest city in the United States without a four-year medical school.  On April 10, 2019, Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center and Atrium Health  announced that the School of Medicine would have a second campus in Charlotte, North Carolina .  Preliminary plans for the campus were revealed August 12, 2020.  More specific details were revealed in February 2021 including a seven-story tower, and on March 24, 2021, Atrium Health announced a 20-acre Innovation District at Baxter and McDowell Streets in the Midtown neighborhood of Charlotte. The Innovation District, named The Pearl  on March 3, 2022, will include the medical school, residential towers, a hotel, and retail and office space. Construction is expected to start in 2022 with the first students attending in 2024.



 Paulownia elongata is a species of tree  in the family Paulowniaceae , native to Asia.
 This article needs additional citations for verification . (December 2012)




 The plant's leaves are very large and pubescent  ('fuzzy—hairy'). This species can withstand a very wide range of environmental conditions. It does not grow at higher altitudes however.

 USES



 CULTIVATION
 Paulownia elongata is cultivated as an ornamental tree  for use in gardens and parks. It is selected for its purple flowers, and its shade tolerance.

 BIOFUEL
 The tree is planted and grown as feedstock for biofuel  production. Due to the large quantity of biomass  produced annually, it is suited for use as biofuel feedstock.

 LUMBER
 Paulownia elongata is planted as a forestry tree producing strong, yet light, wood. It is grown for lumber in North America and China.
 Commercial plantations are normally established from selected clones resulting from micropropagation .

 They are known to grow up to 15 feet (4.6 m) or more in the first year. It is reportedly the fastest-growing hardwood  tree[citation needed ]. Some proponents state that P. elongata plantations can reach a harvestable size in five to seven years.[citation needed ].

 Elis Isufi (born 21 May 2000) is a Swiss footballer  who plays as a defender  for Baden .



 CLUB CAREER


 Born in Liestal , Vishi played his early football by local club FC Pratteln and moved to the youth section of FC Basel  in 2012. Since then he has passed through all of the club's the junior levels. In the 2018/2019 season he made a total of 19 appearances, scoring one goal and in the 2019/2020 season he made a total of 15 appearances, also scoring one goal, with the U21 team in the Swiss Promotion League , the third tier of the Swiss football league system .
 In Basel 's 2019–20 season  Isufi made his professional debut with his club in the Swiss Cup  on 14 September 2019. Head coach Marcel Koller  let Isufi play next to Emil Bergström  as centre backs and they helped keep a clean sheet as Basel won 3–0 against FC Meyrin .  Isufi's following appearance was in a 1-0 UEFA Europa League  win over APOEL FC  on 27 February 2020. 
 After these two games and three further test matches, Isufi Aplayed his domestic league debut for the club in the home game in the St. Jakob-Park  on 4 July 2020 as Basel won 2–0 against Xamax .

 On 15 June 2021, he joined Kriens . 
 On 16 June 2023, Isufi signed a contract with Baden .


 INTERNATIONAL CAREER


 Born in Switzerland, Isufi is of Kosovo-Albanian descent.  He is a youth international for Switzerland.
 For other people with the same name, see Kim Ji-hyun .
 Kim Ji-heun (also Kim Ji-hyeon, Korean : 김지현; born September 10, 1989) is a South Korean swimmer, who specialized in backstroke events.  He represented his nation South Korea  at the 2008 Summer Olympics , and also claimed a silver medal as a member of the 4×100 m medley relay team at the 2010 Asian Games  in Guangzhou, China .


 In this Korean name , the family name is Kim .
 Kim competed for the South Korean swimming team in the men's 200 m backstroke  at the 2008 Summer Olympics  in Beijing .  Leading up to the Games, he topped the field with a solid 2:02.13 to register under the FINA B-cut (2:03.90) at the Jeju Halla National Cup in Jeju City .  Pulling from the near bottom of the pack at the 150-metre turn in heat three, Kim put up a late resistant surge on the final stretch to hit the wall with a fifth-place time and his new personal best in 2:00.72. Kim failed to advance to the semifinals, as he placed twenty-sixth out of 42 swimmers in the preliminary heats. 
 On May 13, 2014, Kim received a two-year suspension from the Korean Swimming Federation and Korea Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel, after he was tested positive for the clenbuterol . 