Asiatic black bear,  (Ursus thibetanus),  member of the bear family (Ursidae) found from southern Iran to the Himalayas, Southeast Asia, and parts of eastern Asia, including Japan. The Asiatic black bear is omnivorous, eating insects, fruit, nuts, bees and honey, small mammals, and birds as well as carrion. It will occasionally attack domestic animals. It has a glossy black (sometimes brownish) coat with a whitish mark shaped like a crescent moon on the chest. Its long, coarse neck and shoulder hair forms a modified mane.

During the summer the Asiatic black bear lives mainly in forested hills and mountains at elevations up to 3,600 metres (11,800 feet). Becoming fat by fall, it spends the winter at elevations of 1,500 metres (5,000 feet) or less and may sleep for much of the time. An adult male weighs 100–200 kg (220–440 pounds), a female about half as much; its length averages about 130–190 cm (51–75 inches), in addition to a 7–10-cm (3–4-inch) tail.

Males and females become sexually mature between ages three and four. Mating occurs between June and October, and pregnancies typically produce two cubs some seven to eight months later. After weaning, the young remain with the mother for as long as three years. Asiatic black bears may live as long as 25 years in the wild and up to 39 years in captivity.

The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources classifies the Asiatic black bear as a vulnerable species. The organization notes that, while few rigorous population studies have been conducted, rough estimates suggest that there are likely fewer than 60,000 animals remaining worldwide. The bear is threatened primarily by habitat loss from logging and the conversion of forest to agriculture in China, where it is most abundant; however, its habitat area has increased in Japan, as people have moved from rural areas to the cities and farmland has reverted to forest. The bear’s gallbladder and bile are highly valued for use in traditional Asian medicines, especially in Japan, South Korea, and Singapore. In China, bile is “farmed” by extracting it from captive bears, but elsewhere in Asia wild bears are hunted for food as well as for their gallbladder, paws, and other body parts.