Mick Dodson,  (born April 10, 1950, Katherine, Northern Territory, Australia), Australian Aboriginal political activist and scholar who was named the 2009 Australian of the Year in recognition of his work to help better the lives of the country’s Indigenous peoples and to promote reconciliation between Australia’s Indigenous and non-Indigenous residents.

Through his Aboriginal mother, Dodson was a member of the Yawuru people of the Broome region of Western Australia. He studied at Monash University in Melbourne, where he earned Bachelor of Jurisprudence and Bachelor of Laws degrees before joining (1976) the Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service. He later directed the Northern Land Council and from 1988 to 1990 served as counsel to the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody. In 1993 he was appointed the country’s first Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social justice commissioner, a post he held until 1998. In 2003 Dodson became the first Indigenous Australian to be named a law professor at the Australian National University (ANU) College of Law. Two years later he became director of the National Centre for Indigenous Studies at ANU. He was also a moving force behind the organization Reconciliation Australia, which pushed for the historic formal apology that Prime Minister Kevin Rudd delivered in February 2008 for wrongs committed by past governments against generations of Aboriginal people. In addition, Dodson was involved in efforts to establish a national Indigenous representative body and to improve access to education for all Australian children.

Aside from his work on behalf of Australian Aboriginal people, Dodson was also involved in advocating for the rights of other indigenous peoples around the world. In 2005 he became a member of the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues; he had previously served on the board of trustees of the UN Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations. Dodson assisted in drafting the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which was adopted by the UN General Assembly in September 2007.