John VI (born May 13, 1767, Lisbon, Portugal-died March 10, 1826, Lisbon) prince regent of Portugal from 1799 to 1816 and king from 1816 to 1826, whose reign saw the revolutionary struggle in France, the Napoleonic invasion of Portugal (during which he established his court in Brazil), and the implantation of representative government in both Portugal and Brazil.

John was the younger son of Queen Maria I, becoming heir on the death of his elder brother and taking power in 1792 as a result of the mental illness of his mother. In 1799 her illness was declared incurable, and he assumed the title of prince regent, which he used until her death in March 1816. John married Carlota Joaquina, eldest daughter of Charles IV of Spain, and supported Spain against the French Republic. But Spain made peace at Basel in 1795 and served as a vehicle for French pressure on Portugal. In 1801 Spain finally invaded Portugal, though peace was made at Badajoz. In 1807, after his victories in central Europe, Napoleon proclaimed his European blockade, threatening to close the port of Lisbon. As French troops crossed Spain and approached Lisbon, the royal family retired to Brazil with the government (November 1807). Britain guaranteed the throne of the Braganças and in 1808 sent an army to Portugal under Arthur Wellesley (later duke of Wellington), which forced the surrender of the French. John gave full military support to Wellesley, and two French invasions were repelled. After Napoleon’s surrender in 1814, John was expected to return; but, on Napoleon’s escape from Elba, John returned to Brazil, which he made a united kingdom with Portugal. On March 20, 1816, his mother died, and he became king.

His annexation of Montevideo led to a conflict with Spain, and his stay in Brazil made the Portuguese impatient for reform. In 1820 the radical revolution in Spain spread to Portugal, and he finally agreed to leave Brazil and to sanction a liberal constitution, leaving his heir Peter (Pedro) in Rio de Janeiro. He accepted radical reform limiting his powers, but the liberals precipitated the separation of Brazil, of which his son was declared emperor. When the French intervened to suppress radicalism in Spain (1823), the Portuguese radicals were discredited and overthrown. John VI was restored to his authority but promised a constitution. The absolutists supported his queen, Carlota Joaquina, and made their son Michael (Miguel) commander-in-chief. John attempted to steer a middle course, separating from his wife and sending Michael into exile.

John then negotiated with Peter in Brazil, using the services of a British diplomat, Sir Charles Stuart. He reluctantly accepted the political separation of Brazil in 1825, dying soon after. He supported his favourite daughter, Maria Isabel, as regent, pending the decision of Peter, who attempted to resolve the dynastic and political problem by abdicating the crown of Portugal in favour of his daughter, Maria II, and bestowing his own constitution on Portugal.