Flora Adams Darling (born July 25, 1840, Lancaster, N.H., U.S.—died Jan. 6, 1910, New York, N.Y.)  American writer, historian, and organizer, an influential though controversial figure in the founding and early years of the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) and other patriotic societies.

Educated at Lancaster Academy, Flora Adams in 1860 married Edward I. Darling, who died during the Civil War (no records confirm her later claim that he was a Confederate army officer), and after some difficulty she made her way back north. She soon instituted a claim against the federal government for recompense for valuables allegedly stolen from her luggage by Union soldiers. Prosecuting the claim became one of her chief occupations, and it was not ultimately settled until 1903, when she won a modest award. She was employed at various times in Washington, D.C., and during the 1880s she began to write for publication. Mrs. Darling’s Letters, or Memories of the Civil War (1883) was followed by A Social Diplomat and A Winning, Wayward Woman (both 1889), Senator Athens, C.S.A. (1889), Was It a Just Verdict? (1890), and others, and she also contributed romantic and sensational short stories to various magazines.

In 1890 Darling was one of the founding members of the DAR and was elected vice president general in charge of organization. It was ever afterward her claim that she and two friends had originated the idea for such an organization some months earlier and that she had issued the call for the October meeting. The DAR’s official history disputes the claim. Her talent for organization was put to good use in the early months of the society’s existence, but her instinct for controversy and self-dramatization soon brought her into conflict with the national board, and in the summer of 1891 she resigned and was removed from her office almost simultaneously. In November 1891 the Darling Chapter of the DAR in New York City followed her in reorganizing as the rival Daughters of the Revolution (DR). The DR differed from the DAR in insisting upon lineal rather than collateral descent from patriot forebears and upon strong state as opposed to national authority in the organization. In January 1892 Darling founded the Daughters of the United States of the War of 1812 (later the United States Daughters of 1812), of which she was for several years president. She published A War Episode, or The Darling Claim vs. the U.S. (1900); her own version of the DAR controversy, entitled Founding and Organization of the Daughters of the American Revolution and Daughters of the Revolution (1901); 1607–1907: Memories of Virginia (1907), a volume of verse; and The Senator’s Daughter (1907).