Ayaan Hirsi Ali (born November 13, 1969, Mogadishu, Somalia) Somali-born Dutch American activist, writer, and politician best known for her contention that Islam is fundamentally incompatible with Western democratic values, especially those upholding the rights of women. Projecting her views most extensively through her internationally best-selling autobiographical books, she drew exuberant praise from her strongest advocates and threats of death from her strongest detractors.

Ayaan Hirsi Magan was born into a devout Somali Muslim family. Her father, Hirsi Magan Isse, was a political dissident who spent several years in jail. When he escaped into self-imposed exile in the mid-1970s, his family followed him from Somalia to Saudi Arabia, then briefly to Ethiopia, before settling in Kenya, where Ayaan spent most of her youth. Throughout her school years, Ayaan received a strict Muslim education, and, as a young girl, she underwent traditional Somali female genital cutting, ordered by her grandmother in keeping with her understanding of Islam. In 1992 Ayaan was married-against her will-to a distant cousin. While en route to join him in Canada, she fled to the Netherlands, where she applied successfully for political asylum; during the process she changed her name to Ayaan Hirsi Ali and adjusted her birth date to make it difficult for her family to find her.

In the Netherlands, Hirsi Ali studied political science at the State University of Leiden and graduated with a master’s degree in 2000. She then worked for the centre-left Labour Party (Partij van de Arbeid; PvdA) as a researcher on immigration issues. While with the party, she developed a reputation as a sharp critic both of Islam and of the Dutch government’s policies toward immigration and the integration of immigrants (especially Muslims) into Dutch society. She contended that Dutch laws were overly accommodating toward immigrants, enabling the formation of "backward" Muslim enclaves whose practices ultimately posed a threat to the country’s stability. In 2002 Hirsi Ali shifted her allegiance to the liberal People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (Volkspartij voor Vrijheid en Democratie; VVD), and she was elected to the parliament the following year.

As a legislator Hirsi Ali became an increasingly controversial figure, championing immigration reform while also fighting for the rights of Muslim women. In 2004 she worked with filmmaker Theo van Gogh to create Submission, a jarring, incendiary film depicting Islam as a religion that sanctions the abuse of women. Several weeks after the film aired on Dutch television, van Gogh was murdered-shot and stabbed, with a knife pinning to his body a letter that called for the death of Hirsi Ali also. Hirsi Ali left the parliament in 2006 following an announcement by the immigration minister that her Dutch citizenship was illegitimate on account of false statements she had made on her asylum and citizenship applications. While debate over her situation raged in the Netherlands, she traveled to the United States to promote her first book, The Caged Virgin (2006; originally published in Dutch, 2004), which criticizes Western countries’ failure to acknowledge and act upon oppression of women in Muslim societies.

Although she ultimately retained her Dutch citizenship, Hirsi Ali moved to the United States in the wake of the controversy; she became a U.S. citizen in 2013. In Washington, D.C., she was welcomed as a resident fellow by the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) for Public Policy Research, a conservative think tank, where she continued to study the relationship between Islam and the West and to condemn culturally and religiously rationalized violence against women. Within five years of her arrival in the United States, she published two more books, which address these issues through poignant accounts of the abuse and adversity she experienced as a Somali Muslim female, as an apostate, and as an internationally prominent critic of Islam. Like her earlier book, Infidel (2007) and Nomad (2010) became best sellers. Heretic: Why Islam Needs a Reformation Now (2015) also was successful. It was followed by Prey: Immigration, Islam, and the Erosion of Women’s Rights (2021). In 2007 she established the Philadelphia-based Ayaan Hirsi Ali (AHA) Foundation to help protect women in the West against militant Islam.