Wes Anderson (born May 1, 1969, Houston, Texas, U.S.) American director and screenwriter known for the distinctive visual aesthetic of his quirky comedies and for his collaboration with screenwriter and actor Owen Wilson.

Anderson and Wilson met while both were students at the University of Texas at Austin, and their working relationship began even prior to Anderson’s 1991 graduation with a degree in philosophy. Together they wrote the script for a short film called Bottle Rocket (1994), which was directed by Anderson and featured performances by Wilson and his brother Luke Wilson. The short film came to the attention of director and producer James L. Brooks, who sponsored a full-length version of the story. Retaining its title and cast, Bottle Rocket (1996) became Anderson’s first feature film.

(Read Martin Scorsese’s Britannica essay on film preservation.)

Anderson and Wilson next wrote Rushmore (1998), which starred Jason Schwartzman as an indefatigable prep-school student and Bill Murray as his wealthy benefactor and sometime foe. Anderson’s third collaboration with Wilson, The Royal Tenenbaums (2001), was a darkly comic exploration of the dysfunctional adulthoods of a family of child prodigies. It was also the most visually ornate of Anderson’s films to that point, featuring the carefully composed shots, richly realized sets, and other stylistic flourishes that had become his hallmark. Its big-name cast included Murray, Gene Hackman, Gwyneth Paltrow, and Anjelica Huston in addition to the Wilson brothers, and it earned Anderson and Wilson an Academy Award nomination for best original screenplay.

Anderson’s next directorial effort, The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou (2004), about a Jacques Cousteau-like adventurer (played by Murray), marked his first screenplay collaboration with writer-director Noah Baumbach. He then directed The Darjeeling Limited (2007), which he cowrote with Schwartzman and actor-screenwriter Roman Coppola. It starred Schwartzman, Owen Wilson, and Adrien Brody as estranged brothers traveling in India by train to visit their mother (Huston) following their father’s death.

Anderson turned to stop-motion animation for Fantastic Mr. Fox (2009), an adaptation of a book by popular children’s author Roald Dahl. The film, which earned an Oscar nomination for best animated feature, was cowritten with Baumbach and featured the voices of Murray, Schwartzman, Owen Wilson, George Clooney, and Meryl Streep. Despite the challenges of the medium, its settings were as detailed and rich as those of any of Anderson’s live-action films.

With Moonrise Kingdom (2012), Anderson presented a gently humorous story of adolescent love set in a small New England town in the 1960s, and its screenplay, cowritten with Coppola, landed him another Oscar nomination. The Grand Budapest Hotel (2014) is a series of conjoined interludes relating to the denizens and employees of the titular caravansary, a sprawling pink monstrosity located in a fictional eastern European country. The film was nominated for an Academy Award for best picture. Anderson earned nods for his work writing and directing the film as well.

Anderson returned to stop-motion animation for Isle of Dogs (2018), in which all canines in the fictional city of Megasaki are exiled to Trash Island. When a 12-year-old boy tries to rescue his beloved pet, Spots, a band of dogs join his quest. An all-star cast that included Murray, Bryan Cranston, and Edward Norton lent its voices to the comedy. Anderson’s next feature film, The French Dispatch (2021), was described as a “love letter to journalism.” It follows various stories that will be featured in the last edition of a newspaper’s magazine supplement. Murray, Brody, Huston, Wilson, and Schwartzman were among the Anderson regulars who appeared in the movie.

Anderson’s other projects included the interior design for Bar Luce (2015), a café located in the Fondazione Prada, a cultural institution in Milan. He also curated the exhibition “Spitzmaus Mummy in a Coffin and Other Treasures,” with his partner, writer and designer Juman Malouf, at the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna. The show opened in 2018 and showcased an extraordinary number of often-overlooked objects from the museum’s collection.