Jacob Glatstein (born Aug. 20, 1896, Lublin, Pol.—died Nov. 19, 1971, New York, N.Y., U.S.) Polish-born poet and literary critic who in 1920 helped establish the Inzikhist (“Introspectivist”) literary movement. In later years he was one of the outstanding figures in mid-20th-century American Yiddish literature.

Glatstein immigrated to the United States in 1914 and studied law at New York University. His early poems were published in Poezye (1919). In 1920 he, N.B. Minkoff, and Arn Glanz-Leyeles published “Introspektivizm,” the manifesto of the literary group In Zikh (“In Oneself” or “Introspection”). In the 1920s Glatstein edited and wrote for In zikh, the modernist journal of the Inzikhist poets (also called Di Inzikhistn), who, influenced by psychoanalytic theories of the unconscious and by stream-of-consciousness narrative technique, celebrated personal experience in free and naturalist verse, rejecting traditional, stylized lyricism and metric elegance. His volume Yankev Glatshteyn (1921) was the first collection of Yiddish poems written solely in free verse. Glatstein experimented with Yiddish, exploring its poetic limits, using popular speech rhythms, coining new words, and engaging in inventive wordplay. His later poetry, although eclectic in rhythm and content, retains a playful sense of irony and use of folk idiom.

From 1938 Glatstein turned increasingly to elegiac verse mourning the destruction of traditional Jewish life in eastern Europe, as in the poem “A gute nakht, velt” (“Good Night, World”). His 12 poetry collections include Fraye ferzn (1926; “Free Verses”), Dem tatns shotn (1953; “The Father’s Shadow”), Di freyd fun yidishn vort (1961; “The Joy of the Yiddish Word”), and A Yid fun Lublin (1966; “A Jew from Lublin”). Two autobiographical novels are Ven Yash iz geforen (1938; When Yash Set Out) and Ven Yash iz gekumen (1940; “When Yash Arrived”; Homecoming at Twilight). His collected essays include the two-volume In tokh genumen (1947–56; “The Heart of the Matter”). In 1956 he published a retrospective of his poetry, Fun mayn gantser mi (“From My Whole Toil”). Glatstein also was a columnist and critic for the New York Yiddish daily newspaper Der Morgnzhurnal  (“Morning Journal”) and the weekly Yiddisher kemfer (“Jewish Fighter”). He has been widely translated.