Ed Koch (born December 12, 1924, Bronx, New York, U.S.—died February 1, 2013, New York City) American politician who served as mayor of New York City (1978–89) and was known for his tenacity and brashness.

After serving in the army during World War II, Koch graduated from New York University Law School (1948). He subsequently practiced law, becoming a founding partner of Koch, Lankenau, Schwartz & Kovner in 1963. Koch, a member of the Democratic Party, was instrumental in dismantling the influence of Tammany Hall power broker Carmine De Sapio, whom he defeated twice (1963 and 1965) as Greenwich Village district leader. Koch was a member (1966–68) of the City Council, supporting liberal causes, before his 1968 election to the U.S. House of Representatives, where he served from 1969 to 1977.

In 1977 Koch was elected to the first of three terms as mayor of New York City. When he took office the following year, the city was reeling from high crime, a devastating 1977 blackout, and a fiscal crisis. During his first term, which many considered his best, he instituted austerity measures and moderated the municipal unions, measures that helped bolster the city’s finances during his second term. Koch, who was known for his trademark catchphrase “How’m I doin’?,” won a third term with 78 percent of the vote, but that period was marked by corruption allegations aimed at his political associates, as well as criticisms of his handling of the AIDS crisis. However, he was credited with instituting an ambitious housing program that led to the refurbishment of thousands of abandoned housing units. Long known for his brash outspokenness, Koch confessed that “I’m the sort of person who will never get ulcers. Why? Because I say exactly what I think. I’m the sort of person who might give other people ulcers.” Nonetheless, some of his remarks were considered racially insensitive and raised hackles among African Americans, as did his closure of a hospital that had long served the Black community. The divisive nature of his last term resulted in his losing his fourth bid for election to David Dinkins, who became New York City’s first Black mayor.

Koch, the ultimate showman and raconteur, stayed in the media spotlight as a columnist, talk-show host, and writer. He published two memoirs, Mayor (1984) and Citizen Koch (1992). The documentary film Koch (2013) opened in theatres the day that he died.