John Garfield (born March 4, 1913, New York, New York, U.S.—died May 21, 1952, New York City) American film and stage actor who is best known for his intense portrayals of rebels and antiheroes.

Garfield grew up in the poor Jewish section of New York City’s Lower East Side. Street-gang involvement and numerous fistfights landed him in a reform school during his teen years, where he soon blossomed in forensic and athletic activities. A scholarship he won in a statewide New York Times-sponsored debating contest allowed him to attend the American Laboratory School, where he studied acting under Maria Ouspenskaya. His restless nature led him to live as a train-hopping vagrant during the early 1930s, but he returned to New York in 1932 and joined Eva Le Gallienne’s prestigious Civic Repertory Theatre. With that troupe, and under the name of Jules Garfield, he made his Broadway debut with a small part in the play Lost Boy (1933).

In 1934 Garfield joined the Group Theatre, the legendary and highly influential theatre company founded by Harold Clurman, Lee Strasberg, and Cheryl Crawford. Garfield attracted critical and public attention with his starring roles in the Group Theatre’s productions of three Clifford Odets plays, Waiting for Lefty (1935), Awake and Sing! (1935), and Golden Boy (1937). His success in these roles led to a contract with Warner Bros., for which Garfield appeared in his first film, the melodrama Four Daughters (1938). His brooding performance as a cynical young musician garnered considerable praise, as well as legions of female fans and an Oscar nomination for best supporting actor. Throughout the early 1940s, Garfield appeared in several successful films, including Saturday’s Children (1940), Castle on the Hudson (1940), The Sea Wolf (1941), and Tortilla Flat (1942). A mild heart attack kept the actor from military service during World War II; fully recovered, he entertained troops and appeared in several war-themed films, the best of which was Pride of the Marines (1945).

Garfield’s status as a cult hero was established with a series of classic films, most of them in the film noir genre, made during the late 1940s. In them, Garfield further refined his established screen persona of a common man led astray by temptation or a latent rebellious spirit. An ordinary-looking fellow, his masculinity and self-confidence projected considerable sensuality and made him a credible leading man. He learned to play the violin for his role as the gigolo-protégé of Joan Crawford in Humoresque (1946), his final film for Warner Bros. and, in the opinion of many critics, his best for the studio. The steamy The Postman Always Rings Twice (1946) paired Garfield with Lana Turner for a classic tale of revenge and deception. Garfield’s acting in a supporting role to Gregory Peck in Gentleman’s Agreement (1947)—a film controversial at the time for its frank treatment of anti-Semitism—is regarded as one of his finest performances. Also in 1947 Garfield made what remains one of his most popular films, as well as the film many critics regard as the greatest boxing melodrama of all time, Body and Soul (1947). In 1939 he had been passed over for the lead in the film version of Golden Boy in favour of screen newcomer William Holden, but Body and Soul provided him with a similar role in a better film and earned him an Oscar nomination for best actor.

Garfield’s final classic from this period was Force of Evil (1948), a seminal example of the film noir style, in which he portrayed a corrupt attorney. Because of its metaphoric condemnation of the American business community, Force of Evil was seen as subversive in some quarters and resulted in the blacklisting of its director, Abraham Polonsky. Garfield also became a target of red-baiters and was called before the House Committee on Un-American Activities in 1951 and labeled an uncooperative witness when he refused to name names. Garfield’s final film, He Ran All the Way (1951), was made for his own production company; it is likely that he would have had difficulty finding work in Hollywood thereafter. Despite a history of heart problems, many close to Garfield attributed his death from coronary thrombosis at age 39 to the stress of his House Committee ordeal.