Alan Rickman (born February 21, 1946, London, England—died January 14, 2016, London) British actor who had a distinguished career portraying a vast array of characters, both virtuous and nefarious, in theatre, film, and television productions. As Hans Gruber, the sinister villain in the hit action movie Die Hard (1988), Rickman created one of the most memorable bad guys in modern cinema. In the 21st century he became known to a whole new generation of moviegoers with his portrayal of the complex Severus Snape, who evolves over the eight Harry Potter movies (2001–11) from young Harry’s bullying teacher into an unexpectedly heroic ally.

Rickman was born the middle child of three siblings to Bernard Rickman, a factory worker (who died when Alan Rickman was eight years old), and his wife, Margaret Rickman. Alan Rickman and his siblings were raised on a council estate, a form of British public housing. He made his first stage appearance at age 11 in a school production and later studied graphic design. Rickman enrolled at the Chelsea College of Art and Design and then attended the Royal College of Art, both in London. At the former, he met Rima Horton, with whom he began a long-term relationship (and whom he married in 2012). When Rickman finished school in the late 1960s, he set up a design company in London and briefly worked in graphic arts before deciding that he really wanted to become an actor. He auditioned for the renowned Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), London, and was accepted for admission. Rickman attended RADA from 1972 to 1974 and won several distinguished prizes for his performances. He subsequently performed with various British repertory and experimental theatre groups, including stints with the Royal Shakespeare Company.

Throughout the 1970s and ’80s, Rickman racked up extensive credits for his stage performances, including roles in Anton Chekhov’s The Seagull, Richard Crane’s adaptation of Fyodor Dostoyevsky’s The Brothers Karamazov, and Snoo Wilson’s The Grass Widow, as well as William Shakespeare’s As You Like It and Troilus and Cressida. His breakthrough, however, came when he was cast as the heartless seducer Vicomte de Valmont in the Royal Shakespeare Company’s 1985 production of Les Liaisons dangereuses. In 1987 he earned a Tony Award nomination when the production came to Broadway.

Beginning in 1978 Rickman appeared in several British television specials and miniseries as well as on radio specials. His Hollywood debut, as the intelligent and evil East German terrorist Hans Gruber in the feature film Die Hard, introduced him to American audiences and launched his film career. It was the first of many roles as complex, often humorous or charming villains, including his splashy turn as the Sheriff of Nottingham in Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves (1991). He became a film star in his 40s, appearing as the leading man in the dark comedy Truly, Madly, Deeply (1991) and Colonel Brandon in Ang Lee’s adaption of Jane Austen’s Sense and Sensibility (1995).

In the 21st century Rickman continued to act onstage, including in a revival of Noël Coward’s Private Lives in London (2001) and on Broadway (2022); both productions earned him Tony Award nominations. Rickman’s film career, however, often took precedence. Besides the Harry Potter movies, Rickman appeared in Love Actually (2003), as a husband who is attracted to his secretary; in Tim Burton’s Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (2007), as the corrupt Judge Turpin; and in Lee Daniels’s The Butler (2013), as U.S. Pres. Ronald Reagan. Rickman supplied his distinctive low voice to Marvin, the Paranoid Android, in The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy (2005) and to the Blue Caterpillar in Burton’s Alice in Wonderland (2010) and Alice Through the Looking Glass (2016).

In addition to acting Rickman directed both the theatrical (1995) and film (1997) versions of The Winter Guest. The film starred Emma Thompson and her mother, Phyllida Law. The Winter Guest premiered at several international film festivals in 1997 and received glowing reviews. In 2014 he directed the period romance A Little Chaos, in which he reunited with his Sense and Sensibility love interest, Kate Winslet.

Rickman was a well-respected and much-loved actor when he died in 2016 after battling pancreatic cancer. A collection of his diary entries were published posthumously in 2022 as Madly, Deeply: The Diaries of Alan Rickman.