Ryukyu Islands,  archipelago, extending some 700 miles (1,100 km) southwestward from the southern Japanese island of Kyushu to northeastern Taiwan. The archipelago defines the boundary between the East China Sea (west) and the Philippine Sea (east). With a total land area of 1,193 square miles (3,090 square km), the Ryukyus consist of 55 islands and islets divided into three major groups: the Amami island chain in the north, the central Okinawa islands, and the Sakishima islands in the south. Administratively, the Ryukyus are part of Japan, the Amami group constituting a southern extension of Kyushu’s Kagoshima prefecture (ken) and the Okinawa and Sakishima islands making up Okinawa prefecture.

The two largest islands are Okinawa (465 square miles [1,204 square km]) and Amami Great Island (275 square miles [712 square km]). The larger islands are generally volcanic in origin and have mountainous terrain, while most of the smaller islands are coralline and relatively flat. The climate is subtropical with considerable rainfall, and the archipelago is subject to annual typhoons.

The people of the islands are thought to be descendants of Japanese and Southeast Asians who migrated to the Ryukyus in prehistoric times. The Ryukyuan language, which is classified with Japanese, consists of three dialect groups corresponding to the main island clusters. There is no mutual intelligibility between these dialects and Japanese nor among the dialect groups. Japanese is commonly spoken by the majority of the Ryukyuans, but local dialects are also used.

Culturally, the Ryukyuans have been subjected to both Japanese and Chinese influence. Nonetheless, they developed indigenous musical forms and, on Okinawa, a local textile craft. In ancient times the islands formed an independent kingdom. Chinese and Japanese sovereignty were successively forced on the archipelago from the 14th to the 19th century, and in 1879 the Ryukyus became an integral part of Japan.

After the defeat of Japan (1945) in World War II, the United States took control of the islands. The military government was replaced in 1951 by a civil administration based in Naha (on Okinawa), the islands’ largest city. The chief executive, who originally was appointed by the U.S. high commissioner, was elected by the legislature in 1966. His election was made popular two years later. By terms of the treaty ending World War II (1952), the United States recognized Japan’s residual sovereignty over the Ryukyus, and the Amami island chain was returned in 1953. Following a second treaty signed in 1971, the remaining islands were returned in 1972. The United States continues to maintain a large number of military installations and thousands of troops on Okinawa Island.

The Ryukyus are primarily rural. Agriculture is the dominant occupation, with sweet potatoes and rice the staple crops. Sugar and canned pineapples are among the leading exports. Tuna fishing is increasingly important. Traditional industries include lacquer and pottery manufacture; newer enterprises produce industrial compounds. Tourism has become a major component of the economy. Okinawa University, Kokusai University, and the University of the Ryukyus are all located on Okinawa.