Melbourne Cricket Ground,  sports stadium located in Yarra Park in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, that is the headquarters and home ground of the Melbourne Cricket Club and is the largest stadium in the Southern Hemisphere and in cricket. Australia is famously a sports-mad nation, and there is no more famous sports ground in the country than the Melbourne Cricket Ground, or the MCG, as it is affectionately known. Although little remains of its original structure, the ground embodies the history of sport in Australia.

The Melbourne Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in 1838 and was granted the land on which the club now stands in 1853 when it was forced to move from its most recent site to make way for Australia’s first steam railway line. An 1876 stand-now long gone-was reversible, allowing spectators to watch cricket at the ground in summer or Australian rules football in the park in winter. The ground has been consistently redeveloped and expanded over the years, most recently to accommodate the 2006 Commonwealth Games. The stadium currently seats more than 100,000 people.

The MCC has played a major role in Australian cricket because it was the first club formed in Victoria, and in 1856 it hosted the first match between New South Wales and Victoria. In 1862 the MCC hosted the first match against an England team and, most famously, in 1877 the first game of Test cricket between Australia and England, won by Australia by 45 runs. England won the second match by four wickets, thus drawing the series. The club also hosted the first one-day international cricket match in 1971 and the 1992 Cricket World Cup final.

In addition to cricket, the MCG is home to many other sports. The MCC was involved in drafting the first set of rules for Australian rules football in 1859 and has hosted numerous soccer matches. The stadium was also the centrepiece of the 1956 Melbourne Olympic Games. Billy Graham held crusades at the MCG, and Pope John Paul II held a mass there when he visited the city in 1986. Also, beginning in 1974, numerous rock bands have performed in this historic ground.