Kārūn River,  river in southwestern Iran, a tributary of the Shatt al-Arab, which it joins at Khorramshahr. It rises in the Bakhtīārī Mountains west of Eṣfahān and follows a tortuous course trending basically southwest. The Kārūn’s total length is 515 miles (829 km), though the direct distance from its source to the junction with the Shatt al-Arab is only 180 miles (290 km). Its catchment basin up to Ahvāz has an area of 22,069 square miles (57,059 square km), of which 7,000 square miles (18,130 square km) belong to its main tributary, the Dez. Most of the area is mountainous, forming part of the limestone Zagros ranges.

The river’s course divides into three parts: from the sources to Gatvand, where the river emerges from the mountains; from Gatvand to Band Qīr, where it is joined by the Dez; and from Band Qīr through Ahvāz southward to the Shatt al-Arab. In its upper course the Kārūn is a powerful stream, increasing in volume as it is successively joined by its tributaries. For long stretches it flows rapidly between high precipices. At Band Qīr the river, enlarged by the Dez, is navigable to its mouth except for about 2 miles (3 km) of rapids at Ahvāz. Below Ahvāz the river is sometimes too shallow for navigation, especially during the dry season. Seasonal variation in discharge rate shows the lowest water level to be in October, and the highest, as the result of combined precipitation and meltwater, in April.

Formerly the Kārūn had a lower course that was separated from and to the east of the Shatt al-Arab. There are three old riverbeds (apparently used successively) that branch off at the left of the Kārūn; they are known as Shatt al-Qadimi (Farsi: “Ancient River”), Shatt al-ʿAmeh (Farsi: “Blind River”), and Rūdkhāneh-ye Bahmanshīr. Rūdkhāneh-ye Bahmanshīr delimits the eastern edge of the island of Abadan. In 1765, however, the river changed to its present course through the apparently artificial Haffār Channel. According to the geographer al-Maqdisī, this channel was dug in ad 986 to facilitate water communication between Ahvāz and Basra. This change resulted in frontier disputes between the Ottoman Empire and Iran, disputes that were settled by the treaty of Erzurum (1847), giving Iran access to the eastern bank of the Shatt al-Arab and the right to use the waterway.

The Kārūn up to Ahvāz was opened to international navigation in 1888, and boat services were later established between Ahvāz and Band Qīr. Shipping on the lower course of the Kārūn has become increasingly important owing to oil drilling and refining in the vicinity. To increase the water supply of Eṣfahān, a dam and tunnel on the river were completed in 1971.