Lena River,  major river of Russia and the 11th longest river, or river system, in the world. It flows 2,734 miles (4,400 km) from its sources in the mountains along the western shores of Lake Baikal, in southeastern Siberia, to the mouth of its delta on the Arctic Laptev Sea. The area of the river’s drainage basin is about 961,000 square miles (2,490,000 square km).

The Lena has three main sections, each about 900 miles (1,450 km) long: the upper section from the source to the tributary Vitim River, the middle course from the Vitim to the mouth of the Aldan River, and the lower section from the Aldan to the Laptev Sea.

In the section from the headwaters to the Vitim River, the Lena flows in a deep-cut valley, the rocky and steep slopes of which rise up to 1,000 feet (300 metres) above the river. These slopes are formed on the right bank by the northern Baikal Mountains. The width of the river valley varies from 1 to 6 miles (2 to 10 km), but occasionally it narrows in ravines to only 700 feet (200 metres). The best-known ravine, named Pyany Byk (Russian: “Drunken Bull”), is situated 147 miles (237 km) below Kirensk.

In the first 110 miles (177 km) from its source, the Lena has a great number of rocky shoals, which occur as far as the tributary Kirenga River. Below the mouth of the Kirenga, water depth in the pools increases to 30 feet (9 metres), and the decreasing gradient reduces the rate of flow. In the middle course, from the mouth of the Vitim to the Aldan, the Lena becomes a large, deep river. The water supply increases, especially after the junction with the Olyokma River, and the width of the river reaches 1 mile (1.6 km). From the mouth of the Vitim to the Olyokma, the river skirts the Patom Plateau, on the right bank, forming an enormous bend; the width of the valley increases in places to 20 miles (32 km). Its slopes are gentle and green with forests, and along them run well-marked terraces formed by rivers. The floor of the valley in this section contains an extensive floodplain with scattered small lakes.

Below the Olyokma, the character of the valley changes sharply. For a stretch of about 400 miles (640 km), from Olyokminsk to Pokrovsk (60 miles [100 km] above Yakutsk), the Lena flows along the bottom of a narrow valley with sheer, broken slopes. The enormous limestone rock formations sometimes resemble the ruins of castles, or columns, or the figures of people and animals; and the area is a favourite place for tourists and rock-climbers. In the Lena’s middle section, the river receives several of its largest tributaries: in addition to the Aldan and the Vitim, it receives the Great Chuya River on the right bank and the Nyuya River on the left.

Below the mouth of the Aldan, the Lena enters the Yakut Lowland. Its valley broadens to between 12 and 16 miles (19 and 26 km), and the width of the floodplain reaches 4 to 9 miles (6 to 14 km). In this section, the river receives one of its most important tributaries, the Vilyuy River. The Lena’s course forms a great arc that trends to the northwest and then to the north around the Verkhoyansk Mountains, which lie to the east. The floodplain abounds with often marshy lakes, and the riverbed divides, forming many islands and branches. The depth is from 50 to 70 feet (15 to 20 metres), but there also are many shallow sections with sandbanks.

In the final section of the river—between the island of Zholdongo and the beginning of the delta—the Lena valley narrows to a width of about 1 mile (1.6 km) as the river flows through a gap between high hills on either side. The delta takes the shape of a rectangular peninsula that juts some 75 miles (120 km) into the Laptev Sea and is about 175 miles (280 km) wide. The islands of the delta, formed by numerous crisscrossing channels, are low-lying and covered with peat bogs.

The climatic features of the Lena River basin are determined by its location, with its upper course well inside the continent and its lower course in the Arctic. In winter the powerful Siberian anticyclone (high-pressure system) forms and dominates all of eastern Siberia. Because of the anticyclone, the winter is notable for its clear skies and lack of wind. Temperatures fall as low as −76 to −94 °F (−60 to −70 °C), with average air temperature in January ranging from −22 to −40 °F (−30 to −40 °C). In July averages range between 50 and 68 °F (10 and 20 °C). Owing to the basin’s remoteness from warm ocean water, precipitation is slight. Only in the southern mountains does the yearly total reach 24 to 28 inches (600 to 700 mm); in most of the basin it ranges between 8 and 16 inches (200 to 400 mm), and in the delta it drops to 4 inches (100 mm). Between 70 and 80 percent of the precipitation falls in the summer in the form of rain. Winters average not more than two inches of precipitation, resulting in a light snow cover.

The prolonged cold temperatures give rise to ice blisters and pingos. These are formed of groundwater that accumulates between the layers of permafrost (soil frozen permanently) over many years and layers of seasonally frozen soil. Sometimes the ice blisters disintegrate with considerable force, scattering ice blocks. The riverbeds and floodlands also have permafrost in some places.

More than 95 percent of the Lena’s water derives from melting snow and from rain; most of the remainder of the yearly flow comes from groundwater. Typical of the Lena basin are high floods (especially flash floods) in summer and very little flow in winter. Complete cessation of flow may occur with the freezing of the river to the bottom. The average annual flow of the Lena at the mouth is 579,200 cubic feet (16,400 cubic metres) per second. Maximum discharge has exceeded 4.2 million cubic feet (120,000 cubic metres) per second, and the minimum has fallen to 39,300 cubic feet (1,100 cubic metres). The total yearly volume approaches 100 cubic miles (420 cubic km). During the high-water period the water level in the upper and middle courses rises by an average of 30 to 50 feet (9 to 15 metres) and in the lower course by 60 feet (18 metres).

The highest temperature of the water in the upper course of the river is 66 °F (19 °C) and in the lower course about 57 °F (14 °C). The river is free of ice in the south for five to six months and in the north for four to five months. The breakup of ice in the spring causes significant damage to the shores: the ice floes grind the rocks, pull trees out by their roots, and carry away large sections of the banks.

The Lena discharges about 12 million tons of suspended sediment and 41 million tons of dissolved matter into the sea each year. The proportion of suspended alluvium in the water is small: even in floodwaters it does not exceed 50 to 60 grams per cubic metre. The mineralization of the water in the lower Lena during low water is 80 to 100 grams per cubic metre and in floodwaters 160 to 500 grams per cubic metre.

The vegetation of the Lena valley corresponds to the natural zones across which the river flows. The main part of the river basin is covered with taiga (swampy northern coniferous forest); in the lower reaches are found tundra and scattered forest. Spruce, cedar, birch, and poplar predominate in the moister regions. In the central valley there are some expanses of steppe grassland, a rare occurrence above latitude 60° N. Characteristic of the floodplain are peat bogs and swamps and thickets of willow, alder, and dwarf birches. In the river’s lower course appear tundra plants such as mosses and lichens, partridge grasses, whitlow grass, arctic poppy, and cotton grass.

The plankton of the Lena is scant and restricted in variety. More than 100 species of animals are found. Commercially important fish include sturgeon, salmon, roach, dace, and perch. The main concentration of these varieties is in the mouth region, where in the summer there is comparatively warm water.

Among the peoples living in the Lena basin, mainly on the banks of the river and its tributaries, Russians are most numerous, followed by the Sakha (Yakut; a Turkic-speaking people), Evenk, and Yukaghir. There are several industrial and cultural centres and farming communities. Most of the Lena River basin lies within Sakha (Yakutia) republic of northeastern Siberia, whose capital, Yakutsk, lies on the banks of the Lena.

The Lena is navigable by small boats in sections below Kachug and below Ust-Kut by larger vessels. The most important ports are Bulun, Zhigansk, Yakutsk, Vitim, Kirensk, Osetrovo, Zhigalovo, and Kachug. The major navigable tributaries are the Kirenga and Vilyuy on the left bank and the Vitim, Olyokma, and Aldan on the right bank. Timber, furs, gold, mica, industrial products, and food are the main cargoes.

Within the Yakut Lowland, various crops—barley, oats, wheat, potatoes, cucumbers, and others—are grown. Its large meadows and pastures support livestock raising. The Lena basin has large deposits of coal and natural gas, and gold has been mined for many years. In 1955, in western Sakha, rich deposits of diamonds were discovered in the Vilyuy basin. Near Olyokminsk are salt beds, and to the south of Yakutsk are deposits of iron ore and coking coal.

The hydroelectric potential of the Lena and its tributaries is enormous (estimated at some 40 million kilowatts), but only a small part of it has been exploited.

The first European exploration of the Lena was conducted by Russians at the beginning of the 17th century. In 1631 a fortress and a settlement were founded at Ust-Kut. The first scientific research was conducted by the Great Northern Expedition in 1733–42. Cartography was begun in 1910, and in 1912 the icebreakers Taymyr and Vaygach surveyed and mapped the delta. Further surveying was conducted between World Wars I and II, when a complete and detailed description was compiled. During the postwar Soviet period, research on the Lena was conducted by the Yakut branch of the Academy of Science of the U.S.S.R. and by other government bodies. More recently, there has been a concentrated effort to understand environmental changes that have taken place in this region over thousands of years.