band gap,  in solid-state physics, a range of energy levels within a given crystal that are impossible for an electron to possess. Generally, a material will have several band gaps throughout its band structure (the continuum of allowed and forbidden electron energy levels), with large band gaps between core bands and progressively narrower band gaps between higher bands until no more occur. The phenomenon of the band gap occurs when two adjacent allowed bands are not wide enough to span the full range of electron energy levels.

In practice, most research is focused on only one particular band gap—that which encloses the Fermi level (the energy level at which electrons exist or are below when a solid is at absolute zero temperature). This particular band gap is present in semiconductors and insulators and thus is the only band gap relevant to the discussion of electronics and optoelectronics (the study of electronic devices that interact with light). It is not present in metals, where the Fermi level is instead enclosed by an allowed band. Hence, metals are said to have no band gap, despite technically having band gaps farther away from the Fermi level. In some contexts, the term band gap refers to the width of a material’s band gap, customarily reported in electron volts (eV).

Based on the absence or presence of a band gap and on band gap size, materials can be classified into metals, semiconductors, and insulators. Foremost, metals can be distinguished from semiconductors and insulators by their lack of a band gap. Semiconductors and insulators may be differentiated by the size of their band gaps, the former having narrower band gaps and the latter having wider band gaps. In some texts, 9 eV is designated as the cutoff band gap for being considered a semiconductor, though this is by no means universal.

That metals are excellent conductors of electricity, insulators are poor conductors of electricity, and semiconductors are somewhere in-between is common knowledge. Lesser known, however, is that those properties are determined by the band gap in each of the different materials. In particular, metals have high electrical conductivity due to their lack of a band gap—with no band gap separating the valence band (normally occupied states) from the conduction band (normally unoccupied states; electrons in this band move freely through the material and are responsible for electrical conduction), a small fraction of electrons will always be in the conduction band (i.e., free). This results in a superior electrical conductivity in metals.

Insulators, on the other hand, owe their low electrical conductivity to wide band gaps separating the valence band from the conduction band. If their band gaps were narrower, it would be feasible for thermal excitations to raise electrons to the conduction band; however, they are simply too wide for this to occur appreciably. As a result, the conductivity of a good insulator can be as little as 24 orders of magnitude less than that of a good conductor.

Finally, semiconductors rank intermediate in electrical conductivity, because their narrow band gaps make it nontrivial, but not impossible, for electrons to be raised to the conduction band by way of thermal excitation. The result is conductivity in semiconductors that is about 4–16 orders of magnitude less than that of a good conductor.

The width of the band gaps in typical elemental and binary semiconductors are generally not optimized for specialized applications in electronics and optoelectronics. Thus it is often lucrative to tune, or engineer, the band gap of semiconductors. To that end, scientists have used techniques such as employing semiconductor heterojunctions and molecular beam epitaxy and, in doing so, unlocked the band gaps necessary to create heterojunction bipolar transistors, laser diodes, and solar cells.