Arctic tern,  (Sterna paradisaea),  tern species that makes the longest annual migration of any bird. It breeds in the southerly reaches of the Arctic and winters in the Antarctic, making its migration a round-trip of 60,000 to 82,000 km (roughly 37,000 to 51,000 miles). Its appearance-white with a black cap and grayish wings-is similar to that of the common tern (Sterna hirundo), its frequent companion.Asiatic black bear,  (Ursus thibetanus),  member of the bear family (Ursidae) found from southern Iran to the Himalayas, Southeast Asia, and parts of eastern Asia, including Japan. The Asiatic black bear is omnivorous, eating insects, fruit, nuts, bees and honey, small mammals, and birds as well as carrion. It will occasionally attack domestic animals. It has a glossy black (sometimes brownish) coat with a whitish mark shaped like a crescent moon on the chest. Its long, coarse neck and shoulder hair forms a modified mane.

During the summer the Asiatic black bear lives mainly in forested hills and mountains at elevations up to 3,600 metres (11,800 feet). Becoming fat by fall, it spends the winter at elevations of 1,500 metres (5,000 feet) or less and may sleep for much of the time. An adult male weighs 100–200 kg (220–440 pounds), a female about half as much; its length averages about 130–190 cm (51–75 inches), in addition to a 7–10-cm (3–4-inch) tail.

Males and females become sexually mature between ages three and four. Mating occurs between June and October, and pregnancies typically produce two cubs some seven to eight months later. After weaning, the young remain with the mother for as long as three years. Asiatic black bears may live as long as 25 years in the wild and up to 39 years in captivity.

The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources classifies the Asiatic black bear as a vulnerable species. The organization notes that, while few rigorous population studies have been conducted, rough estimates suggest that there are likely fewer than 60,000 animals remaining worldwide. The bear is threatened primarily by habitat loss from logging and the conversion of forest to agriculture in China, where it is most abundant; however, its habitat area has increased in Japan, as people have moved from rural areas to the cities and farmland has reverted to forest. The bear’s gallbladder and bile are highly valued for use in traditional Asian medicines, especially in Japan, South Korea, and Singapore. In China, bile is "farmed" by extracting it from captive bears, but elsewhere in Asia wild bears are hunted for food as well as for their gallbladder, paws, and other body parts.The life cycle of the beef tapeworm (Taenia saginata, or Taeniarhynchus saginatis), which occurs worldwide where beef is eaten raw or improperly cooked, is much like that of the pork tapeworm. Man is the definitive host; cattle serve as the intermediate host. Order Beloniformes (medakas, needlefishes, halfbeaks, and allies) Absence of the interhyal bone; reduction or loss of the interarcual cartilage; a single, ventral hypohyal bone; distinctive caudal skeleton characterized by the lower caudal lobe with more principal rays than in the upper caudal lobe. 5 families, with…black panther,  colloquial term used to refer to large felines classified in the genus Panthera that are characterized by a coat of black fur or large concentrations of black spots set against a dark background. The term black panther is most frequently applied to black-coated leopards (Panthera pardus) of Africa and Asia and jaguars (P. onca) of Central and South America; black-furred variants of these species are also called black leopards and black jaguars, respectively. In addition, the term is sometimes used to describe dark-coloured bobcats, lynx, jaguarundis, tigers, and pumas (cougars), even though reports of black-coloured representatives of some species, such as the puma, have not been confirmed.

Black coat coloration is attributed to the expression of recessive alleles in leopards and dominant alleles in jaguars. In each species, a certain combination of alleles stimulates the production of large amounts of the dark pigment melanin in the animal’s fur and skin. Although melanin concentrations often vary between members of the same litter, individuals displaying completely black coats are rare.

The appearance of a black coat may be influenced by other factors, such as the angle of incident light and the animal’s life stage. For example, some melanistic leopards and jaguars display totally black coats, because the finer details of their fur may be masked by diffuse light. In full sunlight, however, the faint spotted pattern of the coat may emerge. Also, blackened or near-blackened coats may result from the retention of black spots from the juvenile stage, which may complement other concentrations of dark-coloured fur, into adulthood. In other species, such as lynx (Lynx), the appearance of black or near-black fur might also be explained by seasonal colour changes.

Melanistic leopards and jaguars are uncommon, with some studies estimating that at most 11 percent of these animals have this coloration. Confirmed sightings, however, are less frequent, and confirmed sightings of black leopards, especially in Africa, are rare events. Before the most recent verified observation of a black leopard took place in Kenya in 2019, it had been 110 years since it had been photographed (and thus confirmed) in Africa.black widow,  (genus Latrodectus),  any of about 30 species of black spiders distinguished by an hourglass-shaped marking on the abdomen. Black widows are found throughout much of the world. The bite of the black widow often produces muscle pain, nausea, and mild paralysis of the diaphragm, which makes breathing difficult. Most victims recover without serious complications, but a bite can be fatal to very small children and the elderly.

Latrodectus mactans is the most common species of black widow in North America. The female is shiny black and usually has a reddish to yellow hourglass design on the underside of the spherical abdomen. Sometimes two small triangles, instead of a complete hourglass, are present. The body is about 1 cm (about 0.4 inch) long. The male, seldom seen because it is often killed and eaten by the female after mating (hence the spider’s name), is between about one-fourth and one-half the size of the female. In addition to the hourglass design, the male often has pairs of red and white stripes on the sides of the abdomen.

The large web of black widows consists of a loosely organized mesh (cobweb). The female may lay several masses of eggs during one summer. The egg case is suspended in the web and contains 250–750 eggs. It is white or tan in colour, has a papery texture, and measures up to 1.25 cm (0.5 inch) in diameter. The young spiders, which are orange and white, emerge in 14 to 30 days. Females may live more than one and a half years.

In addition to L. mactans, three other black widow species are found in the United States: L. hesperus, L. variolus, and L. geometricus. The latter is also called the brown widow and is native to Africa. In the northern part of its range, L. mactans is found most often in brush piles and near dwellings. In the southeastern United States, however, it lives on the ground. L. hesperus is found in western North America.

Elsewhere, L. hystrix, L. dahli, and L. pallidus are found in southern Europe, northern Africa, and southwestern Asia, whereas the range of the European black widow, or karakurt, L. tredecimguttatus, extends from the western Mediterranean region to Central Asia. The South American black widow, L. curacaviensis, whose geographic range encompasses the Lesser Antilles and South America, lives under logs, debris, and trash and frequents stone fireplaces. L. hasselti lives in Australia, where it is called the redback, and L. katipo lives in New Zealand, where it is called the katipō.

Like most spiders, the black widow preys on insects. It makes small punctures in the victim’s body and sucks out the contents as a liquid. Black widows in turn are attacked by mud dauber wasps (see thread-waisted wasp) and other insect parasites and predators. Black widows are members of the comb-footed spider family, Theridiidae.…of the blue-winged teal (Anas discors), which nests up to 60° N in North America and winters beyond 30° S, a distance of over 9,600 km (6,000 miles). In the Old World the northern shoveler (Anas clypeata) has a similar distance of up to about 11,000 km (6,800 miles).…The book scorpion (Chelifer cancroides), 4 mm long, occurs in houses and libraries. It feeds on book lice, carpet beetle larvae, clothes moths, and bedbugs.… and Camaenidae) or with (Bradybaenidae, Helminthoglyptidae, and Helicidae) accessory glands on the genitalia; dominant land snails in most regions, including the edible snails of Europe (Helicidae).bumblebee,  (tribe Bombini),  common name for any member of the insect tribe Bombini (family Apidae, order Hymenoptera). These bees occur over much of the world but are most common in temperate climates. They are absent from most of Africa and the lowlands of India and have been introduced to Australia and New Zealand to aid in the pollination of various flowering plants. Most authorities recognize two genera: Bombus, the nest-building bumblebees, and Psithyrus, the parasitic bumblebees. Certain species are sometimes assigned to a third genus, Bombias. About 19 species of Bombus and 6 species of Psithyrus occur in Great Britain. About 50 species of Bombus, as well as some Psithyrus species, are found in North America.

Bumblebees are robust and hairy, average about 1.5 to 2.5 cm (about 0.6 to 1 inch) in length, and are usually black with broad yellow or orange bands. They often nest in the ground, commonly in deserted bird or mouse nests. Bombus species are social bees; i.e., they live in organized groups. Each nest has a queen, drones (males), and workers. Psithyrus species, having no worker caste, enter Bombus nests to lay their eggs, which are then cared for by Bombus workers. The resemblance between a Psithyrus species and the Bombus species it parasitizes is often remarkable. The British species P. vestalis sometimes stings the Bombus queen to death. There are then no Bombus larvae produced to compete with the parasitic Psithyrus larvae for the attention of the workers.

The Bombus queen lays her eggs in the nest after spending the winter in hibernation. The first brood generally develops into four to eight worker bees. Shortly after emerging as adults these workers take over from the queen the duties of collecting pollen and caring for the hive. The queen then retires to a life of egg laying. For a while only worker progeny are produced, and the colony grows until it contains 50 to 600 bees. In late summer, with the large population of workers bringing in abundant food, males and new queens are produced. Although some males develop from unfertilized eggs laid by the queen, most hatch from eggs laid by workers. In early fall the queen stops laying eggs, and the colony, including the queen, gradually dies out. During this period the larvae of certain moths and beetles prey on the remaining eggs and larvae in the nest.

The next season’s queens have developed from eggs laid late in the season. The future queens, when fully grown, leave the nest, mate, and find a sheltered place in which to hibernate for the winter. The lone queens then start new nests in the following spring.…black-shouldered opossum (Caluromysiops irrupta), the bushy-tailed opossum (Glironia venusta), and three species of true woolly opossums (genus Caluromys). The black-shouldered opossum is found only in southeastern Peru and adjacent Brazil. The bushy-tailed opossum is rare, known from only 25 specimens and a few records based on photographs from widely scattered……in North America are the chipping sparrow (Spizella passerina) and the tree sparrow (S. arborea), trim-looking little birds with reddish-brown caps; the savanna sparrow (Passerculus sandwichensis) and the vesper sparrow (Pooecetes gramineus), finely streaked birds of grassy fields; the song sparrow (Melospiza melodia) and the…authorities have equated Ornitholestes and Coelurus, but they appear to be separate genera.fulgidus), the crested quetzal (P. antisianus), the golden-headed quetzal (P. auriceps), the resplendent quetzal (P. mocinno), and the pavonine quetzal (P. pavoninus)-reside in the neotropics (Central America and South America).cricket frog,  either of two species of small, nonclimbing North American tree frogs of the genus Acris (family Hylidae). Their call is a series of rapid clicks, sounding much like the song of crickets. They occur in the eastern and central United States, usually along the open, grassy margin of ponds, streams, and other shallow bodies of water. There are two species: A. crepitans and A. gryllus. The cricket frog attains a maximum length of about 3.8 cm (1.5 inches). Its skin is slightly warty and brown or green, with a dark triangle on the head and usually a reddish, whitish, or green stripe along the back.35 m; 3 subclasses: Ctenidiobranchia (Nuculida), Palaeobranchia (Solemyida), Autobranchia (lamellibranch and septibranch bivalves); about 6,000 marine and 2,000 limnic species.   Class Scaphopoda (Solenoconcha; tusk shells) Midventrally fused mantle and tubiform to barrel-shaped shell; head with tubular snoutfringe-lipped bat,  (Trachops cirrhosus),  a species of bat characterized by the fleshy tubercules that cover its chin. The fringe-lipped bat is widespread in tropical lowland forests of Central and South America. It has large feet with robust claws, a well-developed membrane between its legs, and large ears. Considered medium-sized, it attains a maximum length of about 10 cm (4 inches) and a maximum weight of 45 grams (1.6 ounces). The brownish fur is woolly and rather coarse. The bat’s call is similar to that of the nonpredatory Jamaican fruit bat (Artibeus jamaicensis). The fringe-lipped bat can discriminate poisonous from nonpoisonous frogs by their species-specific calls. It is also presumed that the fleshy tubercules on the bat’s chin allow perception of chemicals in the frog’s skin.

Although the fringe-lipped bat is best known for its frog-eating habits, its diet frequently includes large quantities of insects and small vertebrates such as lizards. To find food, fringe-lipped bats fly continuously up and down ravines or in circles over ponds, listening for the mating calls of male frogs and katydids. After detecting potential prey, the bat approaches, covering the site with its wings and tail membrane. Using its head to search for the prey under its wings, the bat immobilizes the prey with a bite and, holding the victim in its mouth, flies to a feeding perch.

The fringe-lipped bat is classified as a leaf-nosed bat (family Phyllostomatidae), a very large family that also includes the fishing bat (see bulldog bat).froghopper,  (family Cercopidae),  any of numerous species of small (less than 1.5 cm [0.6 inch] long) hopping insects (order Homoptera), worldwide in distribution, that produce a frothy substance known as spittle. The whitish nymph secretes a fluid through the anus that is mixed with a secretion from the abdominal glands. Air bubbles are introduced through a special valve on the abdomen to create spittle that protects the larva from enemies and desiccation.

The meadow spittlebug (Philaenus spumarius) is froglike in appearance, has grayish brown wings, and is a powerful leaper. It is found in Europe and North America. Some African species occur in enormous numbers and secrete large amounts of spittle, which drips from tree branches like rain. The sugarcane froghopper (Euryaulax carnifex) is very destructive in Trinidad. Aphrophora species are serious pests of willow and pine. One group of froghoppers secretes small calcareous tubes that resemble snail shells and were once classified as snails by zoologists.

The two-lined spittlebug (Prosapia bicincta) is one of the most common species in eastern North America. Adults are dark brown with two red-orange stripes and feed on grasses, weeds, and holly. Nymphs are yellow and are often found on grasses in late spring.…feet) have been recorded for Giant flying squirrels (Petaurista). Ample loose skin and underlying muscle typically form a fur-covered membrane between each forelimb and hind limb; some species have smaller membranes between the head and wrists and between the hind limbs and tail. A cartilaginous rod that extends from the…
grape phylloxera,   (Phylloxera vitifoliae), a small greenish-yellow insect (order Homoptera), highly destructive to grape plants in Europe and the western United States. Their sucking of fluid from grapevines results in formation of small galls on leaves and nodules on roots, which result in eventual rotting of the plant. The complex phylloxeran life cycle includes wingless stages that reproduce parthenogenetically. A winged stage produces sexual forms that mate; females lay eggs that survive the winter.

Grape phylloxera was introduced into Europe from the eastern United States in the mid-19th century and within 25 years had almost destroyed the grape and wine industries in France, Italy, and Germany. Vines were saved by the grafting of European plants to resistant rootstalks of vines native to the eastern United States that were immune to grape phylloxera. Hybrids and fumigants have also been used to combat this pest. gribble,   any of the approximately 20 species of wood-boring, marine crustaceans constituting the genus Limnoria, in the order Isopoda. They feed on algae, driftwood, and the submerged wood of docks and wharves and sometimes attack the nonwoody insulation of submarine cables.

Limnoria lignorum, which occurs throughout the seas of the Northern Hemisphere, grows to 5 mm (0.2 inch) in length and has a gray body consisting of 14 clearly defined segments. It burrows about 12 mm into wood. L. tripunctata occurs in the Atlantic Ocean from New England (U.S.) to Venezuela and in the Pacific Ocean from California to Mexico. It even penetrates wood that has been impregnated with creosote, an offensive chemical that repels most wood-boring invertebrates. L. pfefferi is found in the Pacific and Indian oceans; L. saseboensis is found on the Atlantic coast of the southeastern United States and on the coast of Japan.harlequin cabbage bug,  (Murgantia histrionica),  a species of insect in the stinkbug family, Pentatomidae (order Heteroptera), that sucks sap and chlorophyll from crops, such as cabbage, causing them to wilt and die. Though of tropical or subtropical origin, this insect now ranges from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific Ocean in North America. The harlequin cabbage bug is shield-shaped, about 1.25 centimetres (0.5 inch) long, and brilliantly coloured with red, yellow, and black. Fifty to 60 adult harlequin bugs may be found feeding simultaneously on one large plant, and both adult and immature bugs are often found together.

The barrel-shaped white eggs are ringed with black and laid in double rows of 12 on the underside of leaves. Within a month the eggs hatch into active young, which resemble the adult, except that they are wingless. They molt five times before reaching full maturity and may live as adults for several months. In warm climates there may be three or four generations annually.

Removal of host plants when a crop is harvested and the use of trap crops such as mustard, on which the bugs concentrate in the spring and can subsequently be killed by insecticides, have been shown to reduce losses of cabbage, Brussels sprouts, turnips, and related crops. This insect pest is sometimes known as calico back, terrapin back, firebug, and harlequin bug. The name harlequin bug has been used in South America for a longhorn beetle (Acrocinus longimanus). In Australia an insect (Dindymus versicolor) of the order Heteroptera, injurious to apples and other fruits, is called the harlequin fruit bug.harrier,  any of about 11 species of hawks of the subfamily Circinae (family Accipitridae). They are plain-looking, long-legged, and long-tailed birds of slender build that cruise low over meadows and marshes looking for mice, snakes, frogs, small birds, and insects. Harriers are about 50 cm (20 inches) long. They have small beaks, and their face feathers are arranged in facial discs. They nest in marshes or in tall grass and lay four to six dull whitish or bluish eggs.

The best-known harrier is the hen harrier (British), called the northern harrier or marsh hawk in the United States (Circus cyaneus), which breeds in temperate and boreal regions throughout the Northern Hemisphere and in southern South America. Also common are the marsh harrier (C. aeruginosus) and Montagu’s harrier (C. pygargus) ranging over most of Europe and from the Mediterranean shores of North Africa to Mongolia. The pallid harrier (C. macrourus) breeds from the Baltic to southeastern Europe and Central Asia. Allied species include the cinereous harrier (C. cinereus), found from Peru to the Straits of Magellan; the long-winged harrier (C. buffoni), ranging over all of South America, especially east of the Andes; the South African marsh harrier (C. ranivorus), ranging north to Uganda on the east; and the pied harrier (C. melanoleucus), of central eastern Asia.The extinct heterostracans include obvious bottom dwellers (Drepanaspis) and others (Pteraspis) that were apparently adapted to mid-water, or nektonic, life. Some heterostracans, for example, had movable enamel plates inside the lower lip, probably to provide a biting or grazing mechanism. Osteostracans, anaspids, hagfishes, and lampreys have one…   Family Sparassidae or Heteropodidae (huntsman spiders, tarantulas in Australia) Found in most tropical regions. Eyes in 2 rows; legs extended sideways; large, slightly flattened body.   Family Tetragnathidae (long-jawed orb weavers) 1,000 species worldwide. Males with long chelicerae; epigynum oftenThe Japanese pinecone fish (M. japonicus) normally reaches a length of 13 cm (5 inches) and travels in schools near the ocean bottom. Although small, it is commercially important as a food fish and as a saltwater aquarium fish.…the Mediterranean and eastern Atlantic, Diadema (formerly Centrechinus) setosum of the Indo-Pacific, and D. antillarum of Florida and the West Indies, have toxic spines up to 30 centimetres (12 inches) long. The slate-pencil urchin (Heterocentrotus mammillatus) of the Indo-Pacific has 12-cm spines that may be 1 cm thick-stout enough to…
monito del monte,  (Dromiciops gliroides),  a small opossum representing an ancient group related to Australian dasyurid marsupials. It is the only surviving species of the order Microbiotheria (family Microbiotheriidae) and differs from other living American opossums by having uncrowded lower incisors, a short attachment (symphysis) between the lower jaws, a complete bony capsule (auditory bulla) surrounding the middle ear, and a cloaca (a common opening for excretory and reproductive systems) under the tail.

The monito del monte is found in central Chile and in Argentina. Adults may reach 26 cm (10 inches) in total length, and fat adults may weigh up to 49 grams (1.7 ounces). The colour pattern includes a broad grayish brown stripe extending along the midline of the back from head to tail with a connecting band over each shoulder and hip. The sides are paler brown, and the underside is yellowish white. The ears and all but the bare underside of the last half of the prehensile tail are covered with short hair. The dark eye ring separates the pale brown face from the whitish cheek.

A good climber that is equally at home on the ground, the monito del monte eats a variety of insects and other invertebrates. A captive specimen was observed to eat fruit and small lizards. Females have a small pouch surrounding two pairs of mammary glands and produce one litter a year. These opossums accumulate a thick layer of fat under the skin of the body and tail in the fall and become inactive during the colder winter months.…mountain, or plumed, quail (Oreortyx pictus), gray and reddish with a long straight plume, is perhaps the largest New World quail, weighing as much as 0.5 kg (about 1 pound). The singing, or long-clawed, quail (Dactylortyx thoracicus), of Central America, has a musical call. The tree quail, or long-tailed…
   Family Orthonychidae (logrunners and chowchillas) Medium-sized terrestrial birds, 17–28 cm (about 7–11 inches). Once linked to babblers of Asia and thought to be part of whipbird family (Eupetidae) but now known to be part of the endemic Australasian avifauna. Females build domed stick nests with side…The Pacific tarpon, M. cyprinoides, is similar.…the order are the sparrow-sized painted quail (Excalfactoria), about 13 cm (5 inches) long and about 45 grams (about 1.5 ounces) in weight. The heaviest galliform is the common, or wild, turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), wild specimens of which may weigh up to 11 kg (about 24 pounds); the longest is…pelican,  any of seven or eight species of water birds in the genus Pelecanus constituting the family Pelecanidae (order Pelecaniformes), distinguished by their large elastic throat pouches. Pelicans inhabit lakes, rivers, and seacoasts in many parts of the world. With some species reaching a length of 180 cm (70 inches), having a wingspan of 3 metres (10 feet), and weighing up to 13 kg (30 pounds), they are among the largest of living birds.

Pelicans eat fish, which they catch by using the extensible throat pouch as a dip-net. The pouch is not used to store the fish, which are swallowed immediately. One species, the brown pelican (Pelecanus occidentalis), captures fish by a spectacular plunge from the air, but other species swim in formation, driving small schools of fish into shoal water where they are scooped up by the birds.

Pelicans lay one to four bluish white eggs in a stick nest, and the young hatch in about a month. The young live on regurgitated food obtained by thrusting their bills down the parent’s gullet. The young mature at three to four years. Though ungainly on land, pelicans are impressive in flight. They usually travel in small flocks, soaring overhead and often beating their wings in unison. The sexes are similar in appearance, but males are larger.

The best-known pelicans are the two species called white pelicans: P. erythrorhynchos of the New World, the North American white pelican, and P. onocrotalus of the Old World, the European white pelican. Between 1970 and late 2009, the smaller, 107–137-cm brown pelican was listed as endangered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Though the brown pelican once bred in enormous colonies along New World coasts, its population declined drastically in North America during the period 1940–70 as a result of use of DDT and related pesticides. The birds’ breeding improved after DDT was banned.

Pelicans usually breed in colonies on islands; there may be many small colonies on a single island. The gregarious North American white pelican breeds on islands in lakes in north-central and western North America; all pairs in any colony at any given time are in the same stage of the reproductive cycle. It is migratory, as are some other species. The brown pelican breeds along the tropical and subtropical shores of both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts.

Pelicans were once thought to be more closely related to cormorants, darters, frigate birds, and gannets and boobies, which were placed in the order Pelecaniformes with them. However, more recent genetic analysis suggests that the aforementioned seabirds may be more accurately grouped in their own order (Suliformes). A suggested revision of the order Pelecaniformes places pelicans with herons and egrets (family Ardeidae) and ibises and spoonbills (family Threskiornithidae) along with the hammerhead (Scopus umbretta) and the shoebill (Balaeniceps rex).   Order Phasmida (Phasmatoptera; stick and leaf insects) Often wingless; when winged, tegmina often shorter than wings; all legs similar, adapted for walking; mandibulate mouthparts; no tympanum; female ovipositor short, often concealed.   Order Orthoptera 
Watson’s award-winning Piecing Me Together deals with socioeconomic status, racial stereotypes, and identity issues. She then wrote, with American author Ilyasah Shabazz, Betty Before X (2018), a fictionalized version of the life of civil rights activist Betty Shabazz (Ilyasah Shabazz’s mother) before she met Malcolm X (Shabazz’s……tattler (Heteroscelus incanus) and the Polynesian, or gray-rumped, tattler (H. brevipes). Both closely resemble the yellowlegs but are short-legged and have barred underparts in summer. The wandering tattler nests on gravel bars in Alaskan rivers and winters from Mexico to western Pacific islands. The slightly smaller Polynesian tattler does not…The ruddy shelduck (Casarca ferruginea), ranging from North Africa and Spain to Mongolia, is orangish, with a pale head and white wing patches. Drakes of most shelduck species have melodious whistling calls and are aggressive year-round. In the European species the hen is solitary at the…sand tiger shark,  any of three species of sharks classified in the genera Carcharias and Odontaspis in family Odontaspididae (order Lamniformes), named for their predatory habits and tendency to frequent inshore habitats in tropical and temperate oceans worldwide.

The name sand tiger shark typically refers to C. taurus (and C. tricuspidatus, which was once considered a separate species), which inhabits parts of the northwestern and east-central Atlantic Ocean north of the Equator, the Mediterranean Sea, and parts of the Indian and Pacific oceans, especially in the waters surrounding Australia. Two other species, which were once classified with C. taurus in genus Carcharias because of their morphological similarities, are also considered sand tiger sharks. They are the smalltooth sand tiger shark (O. ferox), which is distributed worldwide but is found primarily in the Indian and Pacific oceans and the Mediterranean, Caribbean, and Tasman seas, and the bigeye sand tiger shark (O. noronhai), which is found in open-ocean habitats primarily in the west-central Atlantic, central Pacific, and central Indian oceans.

Sand tiger sharks are large with stocky bodies that range in length from about 2.25 meters (7.4 feet) in C. taurus to 3.6 meters (11.8 feet) in smalltooth sand tiger sharks; however, larger smalltooth sand tiger sharks measuring up to 4.5 meters (14.8 feet) in length and weighing 289 kg (637 pounds) have been reported. All three species have pointed snouts and large mouths set at the bottom of the head that extend beyond the back of the eyes. Their five gill slits do not extend to the top of the head. The two dorsal, or top, fins lack the frontal spines found in some other sharks. An upper precaudal pit, or indentation, is located at the top of the body just in front of the tail fin.

The front teeth of sand tiger sharks are generally large and daggerlike, with a single central cusp and tiny cusplets on each side of the main cusp. In the upper jaw, smaller but similarly structured intermediate teeth separate the front teeth from the side teeth. In both jaws, the side teeth gradually decrease in size from the front of the mouth toward the back.

Smalltooth sand tiger sharks are distinguished from sand tiger sharks by their relatively larger size and the size and placement of their dorsal fin. In smalltooth sand tiger sharks, the dorsal fin is larger and set further forward than the dorsal fin of sand tiger sharks. The bigeye sand tiger shark differs noticeably from the others because of its darker coloration and large eyes that lack nictitating membranes. In addition, bigeye sand tiger sharks tend to inhabit the deeper waters of continental slope habitats.

The diets of sand tiger sharks and smalltooth sand tiger sharks consist of fish, crustaceans, and squid; although little is known about the feeding habits of bigeye sand tiger sharks, some sources note that they likely feed on the same kinds of prey. Sand tiger sharks and smalltooth sand tiger sharks are sought after by people for their meat, fins, and liver oil, but, since deeper-diving bigeye sand tiger sharks tend to avoid gill nets and other fishing gear, they are rarely caught.

The sand tiger shark (C. taurus) is notable for two features. Litters, which are produced only once every two years, contain only two pups, one from each uterus, with the surviving pup having engaged in a form of cannibalism in which all of the siblings in each uterus are eaten by the largest developing embryo. This habit is common among members of order Lamniformes, and research suggests that it also occurs in smalltooth and bigeye sand tiger sharks. In addition, the sand tiger shark is capable of swallowing and holding air in its stomach to simulate the swim bladder of bony fishes, which allows it to become neutrally buoyant and hover motionless in the water.

Sand tiger sharks are generally considered nonaggressive toward humans, but they have been implicated in rare attacks on people. However, none of the 36 reported attacks has resulted in a fatality. Most attacks can be attributed to harassment from swimmers, divers, or fishermen. Nevertheless, because of their bulk and sizable teeth, sand tiger sharks should be treated with caution. No attacks involving smalltooth sand tigers or bigeye sand tigers have been reported.

The International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) considers the sand tiger shark to be the most at risk of the three, listing the species as critically endangered. Sand tiger shark populations have fallen as a result of their slow reproductive rate, and the species is also targeted by some fishing operations and taken as bycatch (that is, captured unintentionally) by commercial fishing fleets. There is also some evidence to suggest that sand tiger sharks may be more sensitive to pollution and human activities, including petroleum exploration and disturbances caused by recreational boating and other activities in its nearshore habitats.

The IUCN lists the smalltooth sand tiger shark as a vulnerable species. Like its smaller-sized relative, it has a slow reproductive rate. Although it tends not to be targeted by commercial fishing, it is a frequent victim of bycatch, and researchers suggest that it might be as sensitive to shallow-water habitat disturbances brought on by human activities as the sand tiger shark. In contrast, the IUCN considers the bigeye sand tiger shark to be a species of least concern.The sargassum fish (Histrio histrio) is patterned very much like the sargassum weed in which it lives.sea robin,  any of the slim bottom-dwelling fish of the family Triglidae, found in warm and temperate seas of the world. Sea robins are elongated fish with armoured bony heads and two dorsal fins. Their pectoral fins are fan-shaped, with the bottom few rays each forming separate feelers. These feelers are used by the fishes in "walking" on the bottom and in sensing mollusks, crustaceans, and other bottom-dwelling prey.

Sea robins are usually brightly coloured, and some have ornately patterned pectoral fins. The tub gurnard (Chelidonichthys lucernus) of Europe, for example, is a reddish fish with pectoral fins brightly edged and spotted with blue and green. Sea robins are also vocal and can produce audible sounds with their swim bladders and certain attached muscles. Along the American Atlantic, the common sea robin (Prionotus carolinus) is noted for its sound production. The largest species of sea robins grow about 70 cm (28 inches) long.

Some sea robins are scaly; the bodies of others are covered with bony plates. The armoured species are sometimes placed in a separate family, Peristediidae. They are flattened deepwater fish but are otherwise similar to the scaly sea robins.The thorn birds (Phacellodomus), as well as many other Furnariidae, build huge nests of twigs suspended from the ends of tree branches; these nests, which may be more than 2 metres (nearly 7 feet) long and contain many compartments, are used by only a single nesting…Thyreocoris pulicarius, a celery pest, is 3 mm long and has white stripes on each side of its body.…are also called gazelles: the Tibetan gazelle (P. picticaudata), Przewalski’s gazelle (P. przewalskii), and the Mongolian gazelle (P. gutturosa). The last, with a population estimated at well over one million, may be the most numerous of all hoofed mammals.waxbill,   any of several Old World tropical birds named for the prominent red (the colour of sealing wax) of their conical bills. The name is used generally for birds of the family Estrildidae (order Passeriformes); less broadly for those of the tribe Estrildini of that family; and particularly for the 28 species of the genus Estrilda, which includes some popular domesticated birds. Waxbills are seedeaters that go about in compact flocks and nest in tall grass. Individuals of most species are brown or grayish, with touches of red, yellow, or black; most have fine barring. The 10-centimetre (4-inch) common waxbill (E. astrild) is brown above and pinkish below; it is common in Africa-the home of most species of the genus-and has been introduced into Brazil. The lavender waxbill (E. coerulescens) has a wine red bill and tail. Certain other waxbill species are known by the name cordon bleu (q.v.).…by the deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus). Other HPS illnesses have occurred in Florida, caused by the Black Creek Canal virus (carried by the hispid cotton rat, Sigmodon hispidus); Louisiana, caused by the Bayou virus (carried by the marsh rice rat, Oryzomys palustris); Chile andwolverine,  (Gulo gulo),  member of the weasel family (Mustelidae) that lives in cold northern latitudes of North America and Eurasia, especially in timbered areas. The wolverine is noted for its strength, cunning, fearlessness, and voracity, and the species is renowned for its ability to face down and fight larger predators that are more than twice its size.

The wolverine resembles a small, squat, broad bear, 65–104 cm (26–41 inches) long, excluding the bushy 13–26-cm (5–10-inch) tail; its shoulder height is 36–45 cm (14–18 inches). Most wolverines weigh between 8 and 18 kg (about 18 and 40 pounds), with males being heavier than females; the largest males weigh as much as 30 kg (66 pounds). The wolverine’s legs are short and somewhat bowed, the soles hairy, the semi-retractile claws long and sharp, the ears short, and the teeth strong. The coarse long-haired coat is blackish brown, with a light brown stripe extending from each side of the neck along the body to the base of the tail. The animal has anal glands that secrete an unpleasant-smelling fluid.

A wolverine may follow traplines to cabins and devour food stocks or carry off portable items; its offensive odour permeates an invaded cabin. The wolverine is generally regarded as a solitary nocturnal hunter, preying on all manner of game, including voles, porcupines, squirrels, moose, and deer, as well as  sheep and other livestock. Some wolverines have been observed sparring with wolves and small bears over food or territory. Wolverines are also adept scavengers, and indeed a large portion of their diet comes from scavenging the carcasses of elk, caribou, and other animals. Gray wolves, pumas, golden eagles, and grizzly bears prey on young wolverines, with adults falling victim to human hunters primarily, other adult wolverines, and, occasionally, wolves and other large predators. Its fur is valued as trimming for parkas because frost and frozen breath can easily be brushed off the smooth hairs.

The wolverine has a short courtship that lasts from May to August. Males are polygynous; they mate with several females throughout their home range. After fertilization occurs, gestation can vary from three to about nine months due to delayed implantation, which can extend development (see also diapause). A female wolverine produces a litter of one to five kits and raises them without the help of the male. Kits become fully independent after about one year, and males and females become sexually mature between 1.5 and 2 years of age. Although wolverines have a reputation for being solitary, some researchers have observed adult males and females, members of the same litter, and small family groups traveling together to hunt on occasion. Wolverines may live from 7–10 years in the wild and as long as 17 years in captivity.

Although the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources classifies the wolverine as a species of least concern, wolverines are sparse in Europe and in the eastern and southwestern parts of their range in North America because of hunting, trapping, and poisoning efforts designed to keep these animals away from livestock. Wolverines appear to be dependent on areas of deep snowpack. Scientists studying North American wolverines have observed significant population declines in regions experiencing sharp decreases in snowpack. It is thought that harsh winters with deep snow provide more food resources for wolverines. Carcasses of deer, elk, and other ungulates are more plentiful in such conditions, and rodents-a frequent prey of wolverines found tunneling underneath deep snow-are more abundant than in snow-free conditions.…and the Philippines; and the yellow-crowned night heron (Nyctanassa violacea) from the eastern and central United States to southern Brazil. Another night heron is the boat-billed heron, or boatbill (Cochlearius cochlearius), of Central and South America, placed by some authorities in its own family (Cochleariidae).The yellow mongoose (Cynictis penicillata), sometimes called the red meerkat, sometimes shares warrens with meerkats and is intermediate in form between meerkats and other mongooses. It has four toes on the hind feet but five on the forefeet, larger ears, and a bushy coat and tail.apocalyptic literature,  literary genre that foretells supernaturally inspired cataclysmic events that will transpire at the end of the world. A product of the Judeo-Christian tradition, apocalyptic literature is characteristically pseudonymous; it takes narrative form, employs esoteric language, expresses a pessimistic view of the present, and treats the final events as imminent.

The earliest apocalypses are Jewish works that date from about 200 bce to about 165 bce. Whereas earlier Jewish writers, the Prophets, had foretold the coming of disasters, often in esoteric language, they neither placed these disasters in a narrative framework nor conceived of them in eschatological terms. During the time of the Hellenistic domination of Palestine and the revolt of the Maccabees, however, a pessimistic view of the present became coupled with an expectation of an apocalyptic scenario, which is characterized by an imminent crisis, a universal judgment, and a supernatural resolution.

The most famous and influential of the early Jewish apocalypses is the last part of the biblical Book of Daniel (chapters 7–12), written about 167 bce and attributed to a revered wise man who supposedly lived some four centuries earlier at the time of the Babylonian captivity. "Daniel" recounts a series of visions, the first of which (chapter 7) is the most succinct. He sees a succession of four terrible beasts, evidently representing a succession of earthly persecutors culminating in the contemporary Hellenistic tyrant Antiochus IV Epiphanes (the "eleventh horn" of the fourth beast). Daniel then sees the destruction of the last beast by the "Ancient of Days" and the coming of "one like the Son of Man," to whom is given "everlasting dominion that shall not pass away" and whose kingdom will be inhabited by "the people of the saints," who will forever serve and obey him.

The other Jewish apocalypses-the first Book of Enoch (c. 200 bce), the fourth Book of Ezra (c. 100 ce), and the second and third Books of Baruch (c. 100 ce)-are "apocryphal" insofar as they do not belong to the canonical Hebrew Bible. They are extant in Ethiopic, Syriac, Greek, and Latin translations made by Christians rather than in their original Hebrew or Aramaic forms. The reason that the apocalypses survived in this manner seems to be that, after the failure of a series of Jewish revolts against the Roman Empire (i.e., after about 135 ce), the rabbis who began the process of codifying the Jewish tradition turned away from apocalypticism to an emphasis on upholding and interpreting the law of the Pentateuch. Fatefully, however, while Jewish apocalypticism was still flourishing, it was taken up by Christians.

Most authorities regard early Christianity as a fervently apocalyptic religion, intent on the imminent "Second Coming" of Christ to preside over the Last Judgment and the end of the world. Early Christian apocalypticism is evident in the Gospels, which are permeated with language taken from Daniel. The so-called Little Apocalypse, a sermon by Jesus found in Matthew (24–25) with parallels in Mark (13) and Luke (21), foretells the imminence of collective tribulation and chastisement before the coming of the "Son of Man" who will "sit upon the throne of his glory" and separate "the sheep from the goats." Some Pauline epistles also contain apocalyptic content. The last book of the New Testament, the Revelation to John, also known as the Apocalypse of St. John (the Greek term apokalypsis literally means revelation), concludes canonical Christian scripture in a ringingly apocalyptic key. Written in Asia Minor about 95 ce by a Christian named John (the fact that the author gives his true name is the one major exception to the rule of pseudonymity), the Revelation offers a vibrant, sometimes lurid, account of imminent crisis, judgment, and salvation. Evidently obsessed by the persecution of Christians by the Roman Empire, which he refers to as "Babylon," John recounts a series of visions that foretell a crescendo of persecutions and martyrdoms followed by universal judgment, retribution for the forces of evil, and rewards for the faithful. Details are often impenetrable because of esoteric allusive language (e.g., "a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet…being with child [and] travailing in birth"). Moreover, the narrative is bewildering because it repeats itself frequently. Nevertheless, the psychedelic imagery is easily etched in the mind, and the mysteries found in the text have proved endlessly fascinating. Nor can there be any doubt of their ultimate message: the world, which is already suffering, will soon be washed in blood, but the "King of Kings" will come to "tread the winepress of the wrath of God," and everlasting rewards will be given to those who have "washed their robes in the blood of the lamb." (Revelation 14:19)

A number of other Christian apocalypses were written during the period between 100 ce and 400 ce, including the Apocalypse of Peter, the Apocalypse of Paul, the Ascension of Isaiah, and the Testament of Abraham. Although these works adhere to apocalyptic form in recounting supernatural visions pseudonymously in esoteric language, they refer to an individual’s salvation and lack the characteristic apocalyptic content of treating collective history and collective salvation. The trend toward concentrating on individual salvation was reinforced in the theology of the leading Church Fathers, preeminently St. Augustine. The Fathers were eschatological insofar as they believed in the Last Judgment but non-apocalyptic in that they insisted that the time of the last act of history was utterly uncertain. Yet beliefs inherited from Daniel and the New Testament permitted the survival of apocalyptic thinking in the Middle Ages and led to the creation of new apocalyptic works, such as the Revelations of Pseudo-Methodius (mid-7th century) and the Vision of Brother John (late 13th century). Many medieval authors also wrote pseudonymous prophecies that did not take the form of narrative visions but foresaw imminent crisis, judgment, and salvation.

Although the apocalyptic genre disappeared after the Middle Ages, an apocalyptic mood, reinforced by explicit references to the Revelation to John, appears in numerous modern literary works (e.g., Katherine Anne Porter’s Pale Horse, Pale Rider [1939] and Nathanael West’s Day of the Locust [1939]) and films (e.g., Ingmar Bergman’s The Seventh Seal [1957] and Federico Fellini’s La dolce vita [1959]). Moreover, several Protestant denominations in the United States propound apocalyptic beliefs, which have been expressed in numerous sermons and pamphlets by such preachers as Billy Graham and Jerry Falwell, as well in a book that was an American best seller, Hal Lindsey’s The Late Great Planet Earth (1970). The Left Behind series of novels (the first was published in 1995) by Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins, which describe apocalyptic events in particularly violent terms, achieved phenomenal popularity. It is estimated that 40 million copies of books in the Left Behind series were in print by the early 21st century, and a computer game based on the series was also produced.Banshan ware,  type of Chinese Neolithic painted pottery. Its name is derived from the grave site in the Gansu province of north China at which the pottery was found in 1924.

According to radiocarbon dating, Banshan ware is generally considered to be from between 2650 and 2350 bc. The extant specimens include urns, jars, basins, and bowls. Some of the wares were probably shaped on a slow, or hand-turned, wheel. The body of the ware was a reddish brown; there was no glaze. The decoration, mostly in black pigment probably applied with a brush, consisted of geometric patterns or stylized figures of men, fish, frogs, and birds. The handles were set low on the body of the urns, and the lower part of the body was left undecorated-as with most Greek Proto-Geometric funerary ware, to which there was a certain likeness.

The paucity of known Chinese Neolithic pottery at the time of the Banshan discovery gave the find an importance out of proportion to its size. Since the 1950s, however, the large amount of archaeological activity in China has placed Banshan ware in a larger framework of Neolithic Chinese pottery. Similar sites have been discovered in the Gansu and Qinghai provinces in northwest China.broderie,  type of parterre garden evolved in France in the late 16th century by Étienne Dupérac and characterized by the division of paths and beds to form an embroidery-like pattern. The patterns were flowing ribbons of form (generally of formalized foliate design) rather than the angular shapes typical of other types of parterre; and the various beds into which the parterre was divided by paths were coordinated in a single symmetrical design.

The great masters of the parterre de broderie were the French gardeners Claude Mollet, André Le Nôtre (q.v.), and Alexandre-Jean-Baptiste Le Blond. The finest examples were in gardens such as at Hampton Court in England and Versailles in France. The parterre de broderie went out of fashion in the 18th century when the natural-appearing, or English, garden became fashionable.The hassapikos, or butchers’ dance, of Turkey and ancient and modern Greece-now a communal social dance-was in the Middle Ages a battle mime with swords performed by the butchers’ guild, which adopted it from the military.The appliqué form is made by drawing or printing the design on a firm, glazed fabric and then covering it first with a layer of machine net  and then with a close-weave muslin or batiste. A cord is whipped to the pattern along the outline of…
…of the sketch is the character sketch, a form of casual biography usually consisting of a series of anecdotes about a real or imaginary person.…music is the development of chironomy, the use of hand signals to indicate to instrumentalists what they should play. The singer in this manner guided instrumentalists through melodies with which the singer was seemingly more familiar than the players.     The end conditions of a closed tube create a node at the closed end and an antinode at the open end, so that the length of a closed tube (Lc) is one-quarter of a wavelength. For this reason, the length of the closed… Englische Komödianten, (German:  "English Comedians")  any of the troupes of English actors who toured the German-speaking states during the late 16th and the 17th centuries, exerting an important influence on the embryonic German drama and bringing with them many versions of popular Elizabethan and Jacobean plays that are of particular interest to modern scholars.

One of the earliest English troupes to visit Europe was that led by Robert Brown, formerly a member of Worcester’s Men. Brown’s actors performed at Leiden in 1591 and by the following year had attracted the patronage of the playwright-duke Heinrich Julius of Brunswick. Several of the duke’s subsequent dramas are thought to contain plot elements from some of the plays of William Shakespeare, including Richard III and The Merry Wives of Windsor. Other groups of English actors quickly followed Brown, touring throughout central Europe.

The English professionals, with their elaborate costumes, properties, and full repertories of new plays, were immediately successful with German audiences. The English clowns were especially popular, and one of them, Robert Reynolds (fl. 1610–40), was such a favourite that his comic character, called Pickelherring, became a stock figure in German farces. The actors overcame the language barrier with the aid of an interpreter and by much use of mime and crude slapstick, violent action, and extravagant emotion. Later actors learned German and joined with German writers in clumsy and macaronic translations of their plays.

Except for the period of the Thirty Years’ War (1618–48), the English companies flourished during the 17th century. They gradually augmented themselves with native actors and actresses, training many of the German professionals who eventually succeeded them.Gallican chant,  music of the ancient Latin Roman Catholic liturgy in the Gaul of the Franks from about the 5th to the 9th century. Scholars assume that a simple and uniform liturgy existed in western Europe until the end of the 5th century and that only in the 6th century did the Gallican church develop its own rite and chant with Oriental influences.

Because of the desire of Rome to have a unified liturgical practice in the West, the Frankish kings Pippin III (d. 768) and Charlemagne (d. 814) suppressed the Gallican rite in favour of the Roman. Although no known manuscripts of Gallican chant have survived, some authentic remnants of it are found in the repertory of Gregorian chant in the liturgy for Good Friday, among them the "Improperia," "Crux fidelis," and "Pange lingua." These chants embedded in the Roman liturgy help to illustrate the theory that the Gregorian chant that has come down to modern times is a synthesis of Roman and Frankish elements. Certain characteristics stand out from surviving examples of Gallican chant. There is a pull in the chants toward cadences on C, motifs frequently are built on the notes C–D–E or C–E–G, and E is often used as a reciting note.Imaginism,  Russian poetic movement that followed the Russian Revolution of 1917 and advocated poetry based on a series of arresting and unusual images. It is sometimes called Imagism but is unrelated to the 20th-century Anglo-American movement of that name.

The main poets of Imaginism were Vadim Shershenevich and Ryurik Ivnev (pseudonym of Mikhail Aleksandrovich Kovalyov), both former Futurists; Sergey Yesenin, who, after the revolution, was on his way to gaining wider fame; and Anatoly Mariengof, a young provincial. In January 1919 they signed a manifesto, the text of which had been written primarily by Shershenevich.

Imaginism flourished between 1919 and 1922, when the group published some 60 books of poetry and theoretical tracts and owned a publishing house and a magazine. Imaginist poets read at cafés and on stages and drew public attention for the atmosphere of literary scandal they created as well as for their outstanding poetic talent. By 1922, however, Yesenin, the most talented of the Imaginists, began to change his poetics, and in 1924 he announced his withdrawal from the group. Subsequently Imaginism’s popularity declined markedly,  although some avant-garde poets of the second half of the 20th century used their methods.The jarana of Yucatán, danced with whirling scarves, is a Mexican derivative of the jota.…rival Communist effort known as Latinxua, or Latinization of 1930, fared no better. An attempt to simplify the language by reducing the number of characters to about 1,000 failed because it did not solve the problems of creating a corresponding "basic Chinese" that could profitably be written by the reduced…mahakavya,  a particular form of the Sanskrit literary style known as kavya. It is a short epic similar to the epyllion and is characterized by elaborate figures of speech.

In its classical form, a mahakavya consists of a variable number of comparatively short cantos, each composed in a metre appropriate to its particular subject matter. The subject matter of the mahakavya is taken from the epic. Most mahakavyas display such set pieces as descriptions of cities, oceans, mountains, the seasons, the rising of the sun and moon, games, festivals, weddings, embassies, councils, wars, and triumphs. One characteristic of the genre is that the strophes, or stanzas, though intended to be part of a narrative sequence, are capable of standing alone. Each conveys one idea or develops one image, not explicitly but by double meaning and inference. Traditionally there are several model mahakavyas, including two by Kalidasa and one each by Bharavi, Magha, and Sriharsa. To some critics, the preoccupation with technique, the triumph of form over substance, appears to have spelled the doom of the mahakavya. The Bhattikavya, a poem by Bhatti (probably 6th or 7th century), is sometimes added to the list of model mahakavyas. It illustrates in stanza after stanza, in exactly the proper sequence, the principal rules of Sanskrit grammar and poetics. An example of another kind of excess indulged in by mahakavya writers is the Ramacarita ("Deeds of Rama") by the 12th-century poet Sandhyakara, which celebrates simultaneously the hero-god Rama and the poet’s own king, Ramapala of Bengal. The mahakavya has been used by modern poets to commemorate such noteworthy individuals as Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru.

The word is from the Sanskrit mahakavyam, meaning literally "great kavya."mandora,  small, pear-shaped stringed instrument of the lute family. It was derived from earlier gittern or rebec models and acquired its name in the 16th century.

Originally, the body and neck of the mandora were carved from a single piece of wood. It had a back-curving sickle-shaped pegbox with lateral tuning pegs. The four or five strings were hitched to the end of the instrument and were plucked with a plectrum. The mandora was increasingly influenced by its larger cousin, the lute. By the 17th century it had 8 to 12 strings in double courses that were finger-plucked, and it had acquired the frets, separate neck, and tension bridge (string holder placed on the belly) of the lute, although it retained the violinlike pegbox. The 18th-century Milanese mandolin was the last lute-style mandora. The term mandora survives as a name for tenor or alto Neapolitan mandolins that became common in the 19th century.Oceanic music and dance,  the music and dance traditions of the indigenous people of Oceania, in particular of Melanesia, Micronesia, Polynesia, New Zealand, and Australia. Music and dance in Polynesia and Micronesia are audible and visual extensions of poetry, whereas in Melanesia they are aimed more at spectacular display during times of life crises and as a part of secret-society rituals. The arts of music and dance are often intertwined in these cultures, and so they are presented together in this discussion.

The nature of Melanesian music and dance reflects the "Big Man" sociopolitical structure found in many parts of the region. The leader, or Big Man, in many Melanesian societies is often a self-made man; he becomes a leader by creating followers, succeeding because he possesses skills that command respect in his society, such as oratory talent, bravery, gardening prowess, and magical powers. He amasses goods and has great public giveaways, often in connection with the erection of a Big Man’s dwelling or a men’s house, the purchase of higher grades of rank in secret societies, the sponsorship of funeral or other religious ceremonies, or the installation and consecration of slit gongs (or slit drums, percussion instruments made from hollowed-out logs or living tree trunks). These ceremonies occasion spectacular performances of music and dance as well as extraordinary displays of visual art. (See also art and architecture, Oceanic.)

There are basically two kinds of dance in Melanesian ceremonies: dances of impersonation and dances of participation. In the first type, the dancer impersonates mythical or ancestral beings; the dancer-actor becomes someone else, and his attire is usually distinctly unhuman or supernatural-consisting often of huge masks and a full otherworldly costume. The dance movements are dictated by the two considerations that the impersonated beings are not human and that the dancer’s attire makes movement difficult. Thus, the dancer’s movements are restricted to legs and swaying bodies; the dancer’s arms are often covered and frequently used to steady the costume and mask or to hold a drum that is used to accompany the dance. The movements do not interpret recited poetry; however, the accompanying sounds of musical instruments may represent the voices of the supernatural beings.

The second type of dance, that of participation, is often an extension of these dramatic ceremonies, as individuals who do not impersonate spirits often join in and dance with them, imitating the steps of the supernatural. In dances celebrating head-hunting, warfare, funeral rites, or fertility-in which the entire community sometimes participates-the same movements are used, often to the accompaniment of drumming and communal singing. The dances have a character of spontaneity and do not require long and arduous training. Their aim is not the simultaneous flawless execution of music and intricate movements but, rather, the creation of a mass rhythmic environment that might be characterized as a visual extension of rhythm. If words are associated, they are repetitious and seem not to tell a story; they may even be unintelligible. Although the specific structure of any single dance tradition in Melanesia is not yet known, it seems probable that the isolated units of movement would be primarily those of legs and body.

The entirely different world of Polynesian music and dance stands in contrast. Polynesian dance is a visual extension of poetry that uses chant or heightened speech as a vehicle for the praise and honour of high-ranking chiefs or visitors. In Polynesia, power resides in chiefly office, and traditional oral texts tell of a chief’s deeds and his descent from the gods. Genealogical rank is a distinctive feature of Polynesian societies, and music and dance pay allegiance to the rank-based sociopolitical structure, reflecting and validating the system of social distinctions and interpersonal relationships. In these societies, where power resides in the office and the regime is long and enduring, specialists compose poetry, add music and movement, and rehearse the performers for many months before a public ceremony. Movements are primarily those of hands and arms, and interpretation is that of a storyteller. The dancers do not become characters in a drama, and their stylized gestures do not correspond to words or ideas as they do in literature-inspired dance traditions of Indonesia and Southeast Asia. In Polynesia the dancer interprets a story orally, usually chanting or reciting metred poetry, and accompanies the words with actions. Although Polynesian dance texts are based on traditional stories, legends, or myths, a story is not "told" in the usual sense: traditional literature is referred to in a roundabout way, but the poetry is often the vehicle for saying something else, usually something relevant to the occasion at which it is presented. In addition, the order of the dances and the choice and placement of the dancers often supply further information about the social structure.

The structure is known for at least three Polynesian dance traditions-Tongan, Tahitian, and Hawaiian-and the basic units of movement are primarily those of the arms. The only Polynesian dance tradition, however, that has been thoroughly studied is the Tongan. Tongan dance is a visual extension of poetry and is closely intertwined with social organization. This sung poetry is a series of references to mythology, chiefly genealogies, famous scenic places, and contemporary events. The dances, which are performed either standing or sitting, interpret selected words of the text with hand and arm movements. The distinguishing characteristics of Tongan dance are the emphasis on the rotation of the lower arm and the flexion and extension of the wrist, as well as a quick sideward tilt of the head. The legs are used mainly to keep time with sideward stepping movements, and there is a marked absence of hip or torso movement. In pre-European times an important dance was the me’etu’upaki-a paddle dance performed by a large group of men in accompaniment to singing and a slit gong, which was often played by a high-ranking chief. This dance is still performed today. Group dances called me’elaufola were performed by men or women separately in accompaniment to singing, long bamboo stamping tubes, and percussion sticks. An evolved form of this dance, which flourishes today, the lakalaka, is performed by men and women together in accompaniment to sung poetry only. Solo and small group dances performed by one, four, or eight women often follow the large group dances and are more concerned with beautiful movements than with interpretation of poetry, although the same movements are used. In the 20th century, Polynesian dances can be classified into six genres, three of which have survived from pre-European times. The most acculturated dance type, the tau’olunga, is a combination of Tongan and Samoan movements accompanied by Western-style singing in conjunction with stringed instruments.psalm tone,   melodic recitation formula used in the singing of the psalms and canticles of the Bible, followed by the "Gloria Patri" ("Glory Be to the Father") during the chanting of the liturgical hours, or divine office. In the Gregorian chant repertory there are eight psalm tones. Because each psalm verse is divided into two halves, the psalm tones have a binary, or two-part, form. The first part consists of the initium, or intonation, of a melodic fragment; tenor, or recitation note; flexa, or downward inflection, used only if the first half of the verse is long; and mediatio, or middle cadence (resting point). The second part comprises the tenor, sung until the terminatio, or final cadence.

Each psalm is preceded and followed by an antiphon, a nonbiblical verse, the melody for which is composed in one of the eight ecclesiastical modes. The eight psalm tones are related to the ecclesiastical modes, having the same tenor and final note (except psalm tone 3, the final of which is ordinarily B instead of E, the final of mode 3). The psalm tone chosen corresponds to the number of the mode of the antiphon melody (e.g., psalm tone 4 and mode 4).

Differentiae (various endings) are used to make a smooth transition between the end of a psalm tone and the beginning of an antiphon. The differentia that makes the smoothest connection is chosen. Examples are in the Liber usualis, the liturgical book containing frequently used Gregorian chants. See also Ambrosian chant; Gregorian chant; psalmody.(3/4, 3/8), or quadruple (4/4, 4/8). Compound metres are also duple (6/8, 6/16), triple (9/8), or quadruple (12/8) but have time signatures that indicate the number of beats to be a multiple of three. Thus, in 6/8,
Te Matatini,  biennial New Zealand festival highlighting traditional Maori culture, especially the performing arts.

The festival was called by a variety of names after its inception in 1972 and has been known since 2004 as Te Matatini, which in the Maori language means "The Many Faces." It is also the name of the festival’s sponsoring organization, and it reflects the diversity of both the kapa haka (literally "row dance"; see also haka) competitors and their audience. Te Matatini is hosted by a different region of New Zealand each time it is held and lasts three to four days. Over that period, regional winners of kapa haka competitions in New Zealand and Australia compete to gain the national title.

Kapa haka competition consists of 10 disciplines combining a variety of singing and posture dances, all of which are judged according to set criteria, including clothing and skill and clarity of language use. The event culminates with the tallying of points, the awarding of prizes in many categories, and the announcement of an overall winning team. In addition to observing the competition, visitors can buy Maori arts and crafts, sample Maori cuisine, and learn about Maori history and culture. In the early 21st century, visitors to Te Matatini numbered in the tens of thousands.tortoiseshell ware,   earthenware with variegated, surface colour made in Staffordshire, England, in the 18th century. It was a subdivision of the "clouded" (agate) ware made about 1755–60 at Staffordshire, especially by Thomas Whieldon. The brown colour of the tortoiseshell ware is derived from manganese oxide. The different clouded effects were obtained by treating the lead glaze with different oxides; only that with brown mottling is properly called "tortoiseshell," though the term is often used loosely to include multicoloured clouded ware in general.vaudeville,  a farce with music. In the United States the term connotes a light entertainment popular from the mid-1890s until the early 1930s that consisted of 10 to 15 individual unrelated acts, featuring magicians, acrobats, comedians, trained animals, jugglers, singers, and dancers. It is the counterpart of the music hall and variety in England.

The term vaudeville, adopted in the United States from the Parisian boulevard theatre, is probably a corruption of vaux-de-vire, satirical songs in couplets, sung to popular airs in the 15th century in the Val-de-Vire (Vau-de-Vire), Normandy, France. It passed into theatrical usage in the early 18th century to describe a device employed by professional actors to circumvent the dramatic monopoly held by the Comédie-Française. Forbidden to perform legitimate drama, they presented their plays in pantomime, interpreting the action with lyrics and choruses set to popular tunes. It eventually developed into a form of light musical drama, with spoken dialogue interspersed with songs, that was popular throughout Europe.

In the United States the development of variety entertainment was encouraged in frontier settlements as well as in the widely scattered urban centres. In the 1850s and 1860s straight variety grew in popular favour. Held in beer halls, the coarse and sometimes obscene shows were aimed toward a primarily male audience. Tony Pastor, a ballad and minstrel singer, is credited both with giving the first performance of what came to be called vaudeville by the late 19th century and with making it respectable. In 1881 he established a theatre in New York City dedicated to the "straight, clean variety show." His unexpected success encouraged other managers to follow his example. By the 1890s vaudeville was family entertainment and exhibited high standards of performance.

Many future stars were developed under the vaudeville system-e.g., W.C. Fields, juggler and comedian; Will Rogers, cowboy and comic; the famous "American Beauty," Lillian Russell; Charlie Case, monologuist; and Joe Jackson, pantomimist. European music hall artists such as Sir Harry Lauder, Albert Chevalier, and Yvette Guilbert also appeared in vaudeville in the United States.

By the end of the 19th century the era of the vaudeville chain, a group of houses controlled by a single manager, was firmly established. The largest chains were United Booking Office, with 400 theatres in the East and Midwest, and Martin Beck’s Orpheum Circuit, which controlled houses from Chicago to California. Beck also built the Palace Theatre in New York, which from 1913 to 1932 was the outstanding vaudeville house in the United States. In 1896 motion pictures were introduced into vaudeville shows as added attractions and to clear the house between shows. They gradually preempted more and more performing time until, after the advent of the "talkies" about 1927, the customary bill featured a full-length motion picture with "added acts" of vaudeville. The great financial depression of the 1930s and the growth of radio and later of television contributed to the rapid decline of vaudeville and to its virtual disappearance after World War II. Abel Tendekayi Muzorewa,  (born April 14, 1925, Old Umtali, Southern Rhodesia [now Zimbabwe]-died April 8, 2010, Borrowdale, Harare, Zimb.), prime minister of Zimbabwe Rhodesia from June to December 1979, in a transitional period from white to black rule.

Muzorewa was educated at Methodist schools in Southern Rhodesia and then spent five years (1958–63) at the Central Methodist College, Fayette, Mo., and at Scarritt College, Nashville, Tenn., in the United States. After some years as teacher, lay preacher, youth work organizer, and pastor, he became a bishop of the United Methodist Church in 1968.

Muzorewa first emerged as a political figure in the 1970s at a time when all the major black politicians in the country were in prison or in exile. When the British government sent emissaries to Rhodesia to test public opinion about proposals for a settlement of the conflict between whites and blacks, Muzorewa took a leading part in mobilizing opposition to the offered terms. At the time he appeared as a spokesman for the veteran nationalist leader Joshua Nkomo; but the two men quarreled after Nkomo’s release from detention, and Muzorewa chose to remain leader of his own party, the African National Council, founded in 1971 and renamed the United African National Council (UANC) in 1977. He was a member of the Transitional Executive Council set up to prepare the transfer to majority black rule in Rhodesia in 1978–79; and, when his party won a commanding 51 seats in the interim parliamentary elections of 1979, he became prime minister of "Zimbabwe Rhodesia."

When the vestiges of white rule were removed in late 1979 and when the nationalist parties of Robert Mugabe and Joshua Nkomo entered the parliamentary elections of 1980, the UANC was reduced to three seats. Muzorewa was outspoken against Mugabe’s government and was jailed in 1983 on suspicion of subversion. After his release, he retired from politics in 1985. In 2007, after years of economic crisis in Zimbabwe and amid growing discontent with the Mugabe administration, there was speculation that Muzorewa might return to the political arena and stand in the 2008 presidential elections, although that did not come to pass.Abū al-Ghāzī Bahādur (born August 24, 1603, Urgench, khanate of Khiva [now Urganch, Uzbekistan]-died 1663, Khiva) khan (ruler) of Khiva and one of the most prominent historians in Chagatai Turkish literature.

The son of ʿArab Muḥammad Khan, Abū al-Ghāzī spent most of his early life in Urgench. When his father died and a dynastic struggle arose among Abū al-Ghāzī and his brothers for the succession to the throne, he was compelled to flee to the Ṣafavid court of Iran in the city of Isfahan, where he lived in exile from 1629 to 1639. While in exile he studied history, examining Persian and Arabic historical sources. In 1644/45, Abū al-Ghāzī finally succeeded to the throne of Khiva, reigning for about 20 years, carrying on intermittent wars with the Turkmens, the Uzbeks of Bukhara, the Kalmyks, Russia, and Iran.

The historical works for which he is most famous are Shajare-i Tarākime, or Şecere-i Terakime (1659; "The Genealogical Tree of the Turkmen"), written in Chagatai Turkish, mainly a compilation from the Persian historian Rashīd ad-Dīn (d. 1318) and the semilegendary oral traditions of the Turks, and the Shajare-i Turk ("The Genealogical Tree of the Turks"), left incomplete and finished by his son, Abū al-Muẓaffar Anūsha Muḥammad Bahādur, in 1665. This work is mainly a history of the Shaybānid dynasty (mid-15th century to 1665); it is not considered reliable because the author wrote from memory without using sources. The introduction is interesting for relating traditional material on Genghis Khan and his sons. The work became well known in Europe by the 18th century through German, French, Russian, Latin, and English translations.…a celestina was patented by Adam Walker of London; it employed a continuous horsehair ribbon (kept in motion by a treadle) to rub the strings of a harpsichord. Thomas Jefferson, who ordered a harpsichord equipped with a celestina in 1786, commented that it was suitable for use in slow movements……who changed his name to Adi Da (Sanskrit: "One Who Gives from the Divine Source") in 1994, it has undergone a number of name changes and considerable internal turmoil.The worldly monk Agnolo Firenzuola produced several stories, including the fable Asino d’oro (1550), a free adaptation of Apuleius’s Golden Ass. The cleric and short-story writer Matteo Bandello started a new trend in 16th-century narrative with 214 stories that were rich in dramatic and romantic elements while not…Agoston Haraszthy de Mokcsa,  (born c. 1812, Futtak, Hungary, Austrian Empire-died  July 6, 1869, Hacienda San Antonio, near Corinto, Nicaragua), Hungarian-born pioneer who introduced viticulture (grape cultivation) into California.

The son of a landowner, Haraszthy immigrated to the United States in 1840. He went to the Upper Midwest and founded what is now Sauk City, Wisconsin. In 1849 he journeyed with his family to San Diego, California, where he served as a county sheriff and was elected a member of the state legislature. In 1852 he began importing and planting grapevines, and in 1858 he planted the first large vineyard in California, in the Sonoma Valley near Buena Vista. In 1861 the California legislature commissioned him to report on ways of improving and expanding grape cultivation in the state, and Haraszthy thus visited grape-producing regions in Europe and returned to the U.S. with about 300 different varieties of vines to be planted in California. Haraszthy lost all his landholdings in 1866, after which he went to Nicaragua and bought a large tract of farmland upon which to grow sugarcane.…and death of his nephew Aḥmad ibn Mahraz.In 1925 he married Aino Marsio, a fellow student, who served as his professional collaborator until her death in 1949. The couple had two children.
Alain,  (born March 3, 1868, Mortagne, Fr.-died  June 2, 1951, Le Vésinet, near Paris), French philosopher whose work profoundly influenced several generations of readers.

Graduating in philosophy, he taught at lycées in a number of towns, including Rouen, where he became involved in politics and began contributing a daily short article of 600 words to a Radical newspaper. The high literary quality of these articles soon attracted attention and they were collected and published (1908) in a book that came to be regarded as a classic. Appointed to teach philosophy at the Lycée Henri Quatre, in Paris, Alain became the mentor of most of the teachers of philosophy of the next generation in France. In defiance of public opinion he foretold and denounced World War I; on its outbreak, however, he enlisted in the artillery. Refusing promotion, he spent the whole war in the ranks; and it was in the front line or in battery telephonists’ dugouts that he wrote Mars, ou la guerre jugée (1921; Mars; or, The Truth About War, 1930), Quatre-vingt-un Chapîtres sur l’esprit et les passions (1917), and Système des beaux-arts (1920). Later he resumed his post at the Lycée Henri Quatre. His most important publications over the ensuing years were Les Idées et les âges (1927), Entretiens au bord de la mer (1931), Idées (1932), Les Dieux (1934), Histoire de mes pensées (1936), and Les Aventures de coeur (1945). When age and painful disease made it impossible for him to teach any longer, he retired to a little house in the neighbourhood of Paris, where his disciples could visit him. In 1951 he was awarded the Grand Prix National de Littérature, of which he was the first recipient; this was the only honour that he accepted.Alan Rickman (born February 21, 1946, London, England-died January 14, 2016, London) British actor who had a distinguished career portraying a vast array of characters, both virtuous and nefarious, in theatre, film, and television productions. As Hans Gruber, the sinister villain in the hit action movie Die Hard (1988), Rickman created one of the most memorable bad guys in modern cinema. In the 21st century he became known to a whole new generation of moviegoers with his portrayal of the complex Severus Snape, who evolves over the eight Harry Potter movies (2001–11) from young Harry’s bullying teacher into an unexpectedly heroic ally.

Rickman was born the middle child of three siblings to Bernard Rickman, a factory worker (who died when Alan Rickman was eight years old), and his wife, Margaret Rickman. Alan Rickman and his siblings were raised on a council estate, a form of British public housing. He made his first stage appearance at age 11 in a school production and later studied graphic design. Rickman enrolled at the Chelsea College of Art and Design and then attended the Royal College of Art, both in London. At the former, he met Rima Horton, with whom he began a long-term relationship (and whom he married in 2012). When Rickman finished school in the late 1960s, he set up a design company in London and briefly worked in graphic arts before deciding that he really wanted to become an actor. He auditioned for the renowned Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), London, and was accepted for admission. Rickman attended RADA from 1972 to 1974 and won several distinguished prizes for his performances. He subsequently performed with various British repertory and experimental theatre groups, including stints with the Royal Shakespeare Company.

Throughout the 1970s and ’80s, Rickman racked up extensive credits for his stage performances, including roles in Anton Chekhov’s The Seagull, Richard Crane’s adaptation of Fyodor Dostoyevsky’s The Brothers Karamazov, and Snoo Wilson’s The Grass Widow, as well as William Shakespeare’s As You Like It and Troilus and Cressida. His breakthrough, however, came when he was cast as the heartless seducer Vicomte de Valmont in the Royal Shakespeare Company’s 1985 production of Les Liaisons dangereuses. In 1987 he earned a Tony Award nomination when the production came to Broadway.

Beginning in 1978 Rickman appeared in several British television specials and miniseries as well as on radio specials. His Hollywood debut, as the intelligent and evil East German terrorist Hans Gruber in the feature film Die Hard, introduced him to American audiences and launched his film career. It was the first of many roles as complex, often humorous or charming villains, including his splashy turn as the Sheriff of Nottingham in Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves (1991). He became a film star in his 40s, appearing as the leading man in the dark comedy Truly, Madly, Deeply (1991) and Colonel Brandon in Ang Lee’s adaption of Jane Austen’s Sense and Sensibility (1995).

In the 21st century Rickman continued to act onstage, including in a revival of Noël Coward’s Private Lives in London (2001) and on Broadway (2022); both productions earned him Tony Award nominations. Rickman’s film career, however, often took precedence. Besides the Harry Potter movies, Rickman appeared in Love Actually (2003), as a husband who is attracted to his secretary; in Tim Burton’s Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (2007), as the corrupt Judge Turpin; and in Lee Daniels’s The Butler (2013), as U.S. Pres. Ronald Reagan. Rickman supplied his distinctive low voice to Marvin, the Paranoid Android, in The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy (2005) and to the Blue Caterpillar in Burton’s Alice in Wonderland (2010) and Alice Through the Looking Glass (2016).

In addition to acting Rickman directed both the theatrical (1995) and film (1997) versions of The Winter Guest. The film starred Emma Thompson and her mother, Phyllida Law. The Winter Guest premiered at several international film festivals in 1997 and received glowing reviews. In 2014 he directed the period romance A Little Chaos, in which he reunited with his Sense and Sensibility love interest, Kate Winslet.

Rickman was a well-respected and much-loved actor when he died in 2016 after battling pancreatic cancer. A collection of his diary entries were published posthumously in 2022 as Madly, Deeply: The Diaries of Alan Rickman.…cosmonaut along with Soviet cosmonaut Aleksey Gubarev. The crew docked with the Salyut 6 space station, where the cosmonauts conducted scientific research and experiments. After nearly eight days in space, Remek and Gubarev returned to Earth on March 10.Alex Rodriguez (born July 27, 1975, New York City, New York, U.S.) American professional baseball player, a noted power hitter who was considered one of the greatest talents in the history of the sport but whose career was in many ways overshadowed by his use of performance-enhancing drugs.

Rodriguez and his family moved to his father’s native Dominican Republic when Alex was four, but they later relocated to Miami, Florida. There he became an excellent ballplayer at Westminster Christian High School, and in 1993 the Seattle Mariners selected Rodriguez as the first overall pick in the Major League Baseball (MLB) draft. He made his debut with the Mariners at age 18, playing shortstop.

Rodriguez’s first successful season came in 1996, when he accumulated a league-best .358 batting average with 36 home runs and 123 runs batted in. Over the next six seasons with the team, he continued to produce outstanding offensive statistics, most notably in 1998, when he became the third player in league history to hit 40 home runs and steal 40 bases in the same season. Before the 2001 season, when Rodriguez was a free agent, the Texas Rangers signed him to a 10-year $252 million contract, the richest contract ever given to an athlete at the time.

With the Rangers, Rodriguez continued to have great offensive seasons. He won American League (AL) Most Valuable Player (MVP) honours in 2003 with a .298 batting average, 47 home runs, and 118 runs batted in. After that season he was traded to the New York Yankees. In 2005 he posted a .321 batting average, with 48 home runs and 130 runs batted in, to win his second AL MVP title. At Yankee Stadium on August 4, 2007, at age 32, Rodriguez hit his 500th career home run, becoming the youngest player to accomplish that feat. The 2007 season was Rodriguez’s best yet-he had a .314 batting average, with 54 home runs and 156 runs batted in-and he was named AL MVP for the third time.

In 2009 Rodriguez admitted that he used various performance-enhancing drugs (PEDs) from 2001 to 2003, a revelation that threatened to taint his seemingly extraordinary career accomplishments. His preseason admission was followed by a relatively sub-par regular season that saw Rodriguez fail to hit over 30 home runs and amass over 100 RBIs for the first time since 1997. His streak of nine consecutive All-Star Game selections also ended. However, he overcame his longtime reputation of faltering in the postseason by batting .365 with six home runs and 18 RBIs during the play-offs, and the Yankees went on to win the 2009 World Series. In 2010 Rodriguez became the seventh player in major league history to hit 600 career home runs.

Rodriguez missed the first two-thirds of the 2013 campaign because of off-season hip surgery. On August 5 of that year, the day of his return to the Yankees lineup, he was suspended for the final 49 games of the season and for the entirety of the 2014 season for his involvement with Biogenesis, a Florida anti-aging clinic that supplied PEDs to a number of major league players. While Rodriguez had not tested positive for PEDs, his ties to the clinic were documented sufficiently enough for MLB to hand down its largest suspension ever for a first-time PED offender. (Rodriguez continued playing with the Yankees through the end of the season while he appealed his suspension. In January 2014 an arbitrator reduced Rodriguez’s suspension to the 162 games of the 2014 major league season.)

Rodriguez rejoined the Yankees in 2015 and hit his 661st career home run that season to pass Willie Mays for the fourth highest total in MLB history. He also recorded his 3,000th career hit later that year. A seemingly rejuvenated Rodriguez finished that season with 33 home runs, his most since 2008, but his play fell off in 2016, as he batted just .200 as a part-time player before abruptly retiring in August of that year. He finished his career with 3,115 hits, 696 home runs, and 2,086 RBIs, which ranked 20th, 4th, and 3rd, respectively, among all-time MLB totals at the time of his retirement. Rodriguez then entered into a second career as a baseball analyst and broadcaster.Alexander Braun,  (born May 10, 1805, Regensburg, Bavaria-died  March 29, 1877, Berlin), chief botanist of the "nature philosophy" school, a doctrine attempting to explain natural phenomena in terms of the speculative theories of essences and archetypes that dominated early 19th-century German science.

Despite his lifelong adherence to vitalistic principles, Braun added important qualifications to the cell theory-i.e., the concept of the cell as the basic unit of life. He also did much to elucidate the sex cycles of primitive plants. Collaborating with the German biologist Karl Schimper, he attempted to establish an idealized plant model based on their observation that the arrangement of leaves on the plant stem (phyllotaxy) in many cases describes a spiral pattern according to fixed geometric rules.

Braun taught botany and zoology at the Karlsruhe polytechnic school (1833–46) and was professor of botany at the University of Freiburg, Breisgau (1846–50), before holding the same position and serving as director of the botanical garden at the University of Berlin (1851–77). He devoted much of his career to the study of cryptogams (non-seed-bearing plants), which led him to his theoretical system of plant structure expounded in Betrachtungen über die Erscheinung der Verjüngung in der Natur . . . (1851; "Observations on the Appearance of Rejuvenation in Nature . . ."). While he argued against the inductive reasoning characteristic of empirical research, his work encouraged the systematic study of plant morphology; his recognition of the basic unity of organisms in form and function by defining the cell in terms of cytoplasm enveloped by a flexible membrane constitutes perhaps his most important contribution.…physics was carried out with Alexis-Thérèse Petit. In 1817 they showed that Newton’s law of cooling was true only for small differences in temperature. Their work on the measurement of temperature and the transfer of heat (1818) was honoured by the French Academy.Alexis,  (born March 9 [March 19, New Style], 1629, Moscow, Russia-died January 29 [February 8], 1676, Moscow), tsar of Russia from 1645 to 1676.

The son of Michael, the first Romanov monarch of Russia (reigned 1613–45), Alexis received a superficial education from his tutor Boris Ivanovich Morozov before acceding to the throne at the age of 16. Morozov, who was also Alexis’s brother-in-law, initially took charge of state affairs, but in 1648 a popular uprising in Moscow forced Alexis to exile Morozov.

Alexis bowed to the rebels’ demands and convened a land assembly (zemski sobor), which in 1649 produced a new Russian code of laws (Sobornoye Ulozheniye), which legally defined serfdom. Morozov’s place as the court favourite was taken first by Prince N.I. Odoyevsky and then by the patriarch Nikon. Russia accepted sovereignty over the Dnieper Cossacks in January 1654 and, in the following May, entered into a drawn-out war with Poland. This also involved a conflict with Sweden from 1656 to 1661. By the Treaty of Andrusovo (January 1667), which ended the Polish war, Russia won possession of Smolensk, Kiev, and the section of Ukraine lying east of the Dnieper River.

A notable event of Alexis’s reign was the schism in the Russian Orthodox Church. The tsar backed Nikon’s efforts to revise Russian liturgical books and certain rituals that during the preceding century had departed from their Greek models. Although before long he became estranged from Nikon, whose violent temper and authoritarian inclinations had earned him many enemies, the revisions that Nikon initiated were retained, and the opponents of the reform were excommunicated. After the disgrace of Nikon, A.L. Ordyn-Nashchokin was the tsar’s principal adviser until A.S. Matveyev took his place in 1671.

During the reign of Alexis the peasants were tied to the land and to the landlord and were thus finally enserfed; the land assemblies were allowed to fall into gradual disuse; and the professional bureaucracy and regular army grew in importance. Because of Alexis’s encouragement of trade with the West, foreign influences also began to crack the hitherto fairly solid wall separating Russia from its European neighbours. Dissatisfaction with his reign centred in the cities (which chafed under the economic competition of foreigners) and among the peasantry (which was deprived of the last vestiges of freedom). This social dissatisfaction expressed itself in frequent rebellions, the most savage of which was the peasant uprising on the eastern borderlands led by Stenka Razin from 1667 to 1671.

Virtually all the sources agree that Alexis was a gentle, warmhearted, and popular ruler. His main fault was weakness; throughout most of his reign, matters of state were handled by favourites, some of whom were incompetent or outright fools.

He was married twice, first to Mariya Ilinichna Miloslavskaya (with whom he had two sons, the future tsars Fyodor III and Ivan V, as well as several daughters), then to Natalya Kirillovna Naryshkina, whose son became Peter I the Great.Aloys Reding (born 1765-died  1818, Schwyz, Switz.) Swiss politician and military hero who was for a time (1801–02) head of state of the short-lived Helvetic Republic.

After some years in the armies of Spain, Reding returned to Switzerland, where he joined the native struggle against the invading French. On May 2–3, 1798, he led the stubborn Swiss defense at Schindellegi and Rotenturm but was ultimately forced to capitulate. In the politics of the new French satellite state-the Helvetic Republic-he sided with the partisans of the old federalism and steadily opposed French influence. Only a reluctant participant in politics, Reding was nonetheless elected Landammann (chief executive) of the republic after the coup in October 1801. As Landammann, he pressed for federalist constitutional revision, but in this effort he met the resistance of the controlling Napoleonic veto. Replaced by another coup (April 17, 1802), he was named to head a rival insurrectionary government (August–September 1802) but was subsequently imprisoned upon the restoration of order by French troops. Later, under the government of Napoleon’s new Swiss Confederation, Reding generally confined himself to the cantonal politics of Schwyz.Neoplatonism was established by Ammonius Saccas (fl. early 3rd century ce), who had been brought up as a Christian but had abandoned his religion for the study of Plato. Because Ammonius wrote nothing, his philosophy is known only through his famous disciple, Plotinus (205–270). But Plotinus did not publish…Andrew II, (born 1175-died  Oct. 26, 1235) king of Hungary (1205–35) whose reign was marked by controversy with barons and the great feudatories and by the issuance of the Golden Bull of 1222 (q.v.), which has been called the Hungarian Magna Carta.

The son of Béla III, Andrew succeeded László III, his elder brother’s son, on the throne in 1205. Powerful landed interests forced Andrew to spend royal funds so recklessly that the crown was soon impoverished and dependent on the feudatories, who soon reduced Hungary to a state of near anarchy. Objecting to the prodigality of the German followers of Andrew’s first wife, Gertrude of Meran, rebellious nobles murdered her in 1213. Four years later, with an army of 15,000 men, Andrew set off on an ill-fated Crusade to the Holy Land. After his return the barons forced him to agree to the Golden Bull, which became an important source of the Hungarian constitution. It limited royal rights and prerogatives, confirmed basic rights of smallholders and nobles, guaranteed justice for all, and promised to improve the coinage. Under it, nobles had the right to resist by force any royal decree.

During Andrew’s reign the Teutonic Knights, who had occupied parts of Transylvania for 14 years, came into conflict with both royal and ecclesiastical authority, and the order was expelled from Hungary in 1225. Andrew’s daughter by Gertrude was canonized as St. Elizabeth of Hungary.Anja Pärson,  (born April 25, 1981, Umeå, Sweden), Swedish skier who in 2007 became the first person to win world championship races in each of the five disciplines of Alpine ski racing.

Pärson was coached by her father at the same ski club in tiny Tärnaby, Sweden, that had produced Ingemar Stenmark, who during his career (1973–89) won more races than any other skier in history. Pärson idolized Stenmark and from a young age was compared to him, as well as to Pernilla Wiberg, whose nine Olympic and world championship medals in the 1990s had made her Sweden’s most successful woman skier. By 2007, however, Pärson had surpassed Wiberg by amassing a combined 16 medals in the Olympics and the world championships.

Pärson flashed hints of Wiberg-like greatness in 1998 at age 17 when she won her first World Cup race, the slalom, at Mammoth Mountain, California. In 2000 she secured the gold in the slalom and the giant slalom (GS) at the world juniors championships. The following year she made an auspicious debut at the world championships in Austria, beginning her assault on the five disciplines with a gold in the slalom and a bronze in the GS.

Pärson competed in her first Olympics at the 2002 Salt Lake City (Utah) Winter Games, where she took the silver medal in the GS and the bronze in the slalom. She triumphed in the GS at the 2003 world championships, held in Saint Moritz, Switzerland, before embarking on a two-year run of World Cup overall titles in 2003–04 and 2004–05. At the 2005 world championships in Bormio, Italy, Pärson won in a third discipline, the supergiant slalom (super G), while adding another gold in the GS.

Pärson entered the 2006 Olympics in Turin, Italy, with high expectations but had somewhat disappointing finishes in her first events, earning bronze medals in the combined and the downhill. She came back to take the gold in the slalom, however, and afterward performed a sprawling belly-flop slide that she called "the walrus"; it became her signature victory celebration. At the 2007 world championships in Åre, Sweden, Pärson-despite having had knee surgery after the 2005–06 season-claimed the gold in the super G for the second time in her career. Next, she won the combined, which gave her victories in four of the five disciplines. Two days later, capping off an amazing streak, she won the downhill to complete her historic sweep. Four other skiers previously had won in four of the five disciplines, but Pärson stood alone with her world championship triumphs in the slalom, GS, super G, combined, and downhill. She finished the 2008 season in sixth place in the overall World Cup standings, having reached the victory podium in just 5 of her 35 starts. At the Vancouver 2010 Olympics, Pärson won a bronze medal in the super combined. She retired from competitive skiing following the 2012 World Cup with 42 career World Cup race wins to her name.Anna Pavlova (born January 31 [February 12, New Style], 1881, St. Petersburg, Russia-died January 23, 1931, The Hague, Netherlands) Russian ballerina, the most-celebrated dancer of her time.

Pavlova studied at the Imperial School of Ballet at the Mariinsky Theatre from 1891, joined the Imperial Ballet in 1899, and became a prima ballerina in 1906. In 1909 she went to Paris on the historic tour of the Ballets Russes. After 1913 she danced independently with her own company throughout the world.

The place and time of Pavlova’s birth could hardly have been better for a child with an innate talent for dancing. Tsarist Russia maintained magnificent imperial schools for the performing arts. Entry was by examination, and, although Pavlova’s mother was poor-Anna’s father had died when she was two years old-the child was accepted for training at the Imperial School of Ballet at the Mariinsky Theatre in St. Petersburg in 1891.

Following ballet tradition, Pavlova learned her art from teachers who were themselves great dancers. She graduated to the Imperial Ballet in 1899 and rose steadily through the grades to become prima ballerina in 1906. By this time she had already danced Giselle with considerable success.

Almost immediately, in 1907, the pattern of her life began to emerge. That year, with a few other dancers, she went on a European tour to Riga, Stockholm, Copenhagen, Berlin, and Prague. She was acclaimed, and another tour took place in 1908. In 1909 the impresario Serge Diaghilev staged a historic season of Russian ballet in Paris, and Pavlova appeared briefly with the company there and later in London. But her experience of touring with a small group had given her a taste for independence, and she never became part of Diaghilev’s closely knit Ballets Russes. Her destiny was not, as was theirs, to innovate but simply to show the beauties of classical ballet throughout the world. While she was still taking leave from the Mariinsky Theatre, she danced in New York City and London in 1910 with Mikhail Mordkin.

Once she left the Imperial Ballet in 1913, her frontiers were extended. For the rest of her life, with various partners (including Laurent Novikov and Pierre Vladimirov) and companies, she was a wandering missionary for her art, giving a vast number of people their introduction to ballet. Whatever the limitations of the rest of the company, which inevitably was largely a well-trained, dedicated band of young disciples, Pavlova’s own performances left those who watched them with a lasting memory of disciplined grace, poetic movement, and incarnate magic. Her quality was, above all, the powerful and elusive one of true glamour.

Pavlova’s independent tours, which began in 1914, took her to remote parts of the world. These tours were managed by her husband, Victor Dandré. The repertoire of Anna Pavlova’s company was in large part conventional. They danced excerpts or adaptations of Mariinsky successes such as Don Quixote, La Fille mal gardée ("The Girl Poorly Managed"), The Fairy Doll, or Giselle, of which she was an outstanding interpreter. The most famous numbers, however, were the succession of ephemeral solos, which were endowed by her with an inimitable enchantment: The Dragonfly, Californian Poppy, Gavotte, and Christmas are names that lingered in the thoughts of her audiences, together with her single choreographic endeavour, Autumn Leaves (1918).

Pavlova’s enthusiasm for ethnic dances was reflected in her programs. Polish, Russian, and Mexican dances were performed. Her visits to India and Japan led her to a serious study of their dance techniques. She compiled these studies into Oriental Impressions, collaborating on the Indian scenes with Uday Shankar, later to become one of the greatest performers of Indian dance, and in this way playing an important part in the renaissance of the dance in India.

Because she was the company’s raison d’être, the source of its public appeal and, therefore, its financial stability, Pavlova’s burden was extreme. It was hardly surprising, therefore, that, by the end of her life, her technique was faltering, and she was relying increasingly on her unique qualities of personality.

Pavlova’s personal life was undramatic apart from occasional professional headlines, as when, in 1911, she quarreled with Mordkin. For some time she kept secret her marriage to her manager, Victor Dandré. The pair never had children; however, in 1920, Pavlova founded a home for Russian refugee orphans in Paris. She loved birds and animals, and her home in London, Ivy House, Hampstead, became famous for the ornamental lake with swans, beside which she was photographed and filmed, recalling her most famous solo, The Dying Swan, which the choreographer Michel Fokine had created for her in 1905. These film sequences are among the few extant of her and are included in a compilation called The Immortal Swan, together with some extracts from her solos filmed one afternoon in Hollywood, in 1924, by the actor Douglas Fairbanks, Sr.

The meringue-based dessert known as pavlova and served at holidays in Australia and New Zealand was created and named in her honour. It commemorates the fluffy tutus of the dancer, who toured Australasia in 1926 and 1929.Anne, 1er duke de Noailles,  (died February 15, 1678, Paris), count of Noailles (grandson of the first count, Antoine of Noailles) who was created the first duc de Noailles and a peer of France in 1663. He had played an important part in the Fronde and had become a protégé of Cardinal Mazarin. He was made premier captain of Louis XIV’s bodyguard in 1648 and became captain general (governor) of the newly won province of Roussillon, to which his descendants were usually appointed thereafter.Anne Boleyn (born 1507?-died  May 19, 1536, London, England) second wife of King Henry VIII of England and mother of Queen Elizabeth I. The events surrounding the annulment of Henry’s marriage to his first wife, Catherine of Aragon, and his marriage to Anne led him to break with the Roman Catholic Church and brought about the English Reformation.

Anne’s father was Sir Thomas Boleyn, later earl of Wiltshire and Ormonde. After spending part of her childhood in France, she returned to England in 1522 and lived at Henry’s court and drew many admirers. A desired marriage with Lord Henry Percy was prevented on Henry’s order by Cardinal Wolsey, and at some undetermined point the king himself fell in love with her.

In 1527 Henry initiated secret proceedings to obtain an annulment from his wife, the aging Catherine of Aragon; his ultimate aim was to father a legitimate male heir to the throne. For six years Pope Clement VII, under pressure from Henry’s rival Charles V, refused to grant the annulment, but all the while Henry’s passion for Anne was strengthening his determination to rid himself of his queen. About January 25, 1533, Henry and Anne were secretly married. The union was made public on Easter of that year, and on May 23 Henry had the archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, pronounce the marriage to Catherine null and void. In September Anne gave birth to a daughter, the future queen Elizabeth I.

Anne’s arrogant behaviour soon made her unpopular at court. Although Henry lost interest in her and began liaisons with other women, the birth of a son might have saved the marriage. Anne had a miscarriage in 1534, and in January 1536 she gave birth to a stillborn male child. On May 2, 1536, Henry had her committed to the Tower of London on a charge of adultery with various men and even incest with her own brother. She was tried by a court of peers, unanimously convicted, and beheaded on May 19. On May 30 Henry married Jane Seymour. That Anne was guilty as charged is unlikely; she was the apparent victim of a temporary court faction supported by Thomas Cromwell.Annie Leibovitz,  (born October 2, 1949, Waterbury, Connecticut, U.S.), American photographer renowned for her dramatic, quirky, and iconic portraits of a great variety of celebrities. Her signature style is crisp and well lighted.

Leibovitz’s father had a military career, and her mother was a dancer. The family was living in the Philippines in 1967 when Leibovitz enrolled in the San Francisco Art Institute (B.F.A., 1971), intending to become a painter. After taking a night class in photography, however, she quickly became engrossed in that medium. In 1970, while still a student, she was given her first commercial assignment for Rolling Stone magazine: to photograph John Lennon. Three years later Leibovitz became the publication’s chief photographer, directing her energies toward a unique presentation of the major personalities of contemporary rock music. In 1975 she documented the Rolling Stones’ six-month North American concert tour, during which she shot several widely reproduced photographs of guitarist Keith Richards and lead singer Mick Jagger. (She also became addicted to cocaine, a habit she kicked some years later when she joined the staff of Vanity Fair magazine.) Perhaps her most famous work from this period is a portrait of Lennon and Yoko Ono that was published on the cover of Rolling Stone in January 1981. In the picture, shot mere hours before Lennon’s assassination, the singer-songwriter is nude and wrapped like a fetus around his fully clothed wife.

In 1983 Leibovitz produced a 60-print show that toured Europe and the United States. The accompanying book, Annie Leibovitz: Photographs, was a best seller. That same year she joined the staff of Vanity Fair, which broadened her pool of subjects to include film stars, athletes, and political figures. For her portraits, Leibovitz-who viewed her photographic sessions as collaborations-typically spent days observing her subjects’ daily lives and worked to make her portraits of them unique and witty, each a technically exquisite distillation. Her commercial images were dramatic and staged rather than casual.

She received the American Society of Magazine Photographers award for photographer of the year in 1983. She began to work as an advertising photographer in 1986, gaining such clients as Honda, American Express (the "Portraits" campaign), and the Gap ("Individual of Style" campaign). The American Express ad campaign that used her photos won a Clio Award, recognizing advertising excellence worldwide, in 1987. She later was involved in the California Milk Processor Board (the "Got Milk?" campaign) and shot a series of ads featuring celebrities as Disney characters for Disney theme parks. In 2011 she photographed seven top female athletes for the sportswear company Nike’s "Make Yourself" campaign. Her style throughout these projects was characterized by carefully staged settings, superb lighting, and her trademark use of vivid colour.

In 1991 Leibovitz had her first museum exhibition; she became the first woman and second living photographer to show at the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C. A companion book, Photographs: Annie Leibovitz 1970–1990, was published in 1991. She also earned much praise for her portraits of American Olympians taken for an exhibit at the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta, which were later published in the book Olympic Portraits (1996). In 1999 she published a collection of photographs titled Women, with an essay by intellectual and writer Susan Sontag, who was her lover. An exhibition at the Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., accompanied the publication. In 2016 Leibovitz updated the series and presented it as a traveling exhibition, "Women: New Portraits."

In 2000 Leibovitz was among the first group of Americans to be designated a Library of Congress Living Legend. Among the later publications of her work were American Music (2003); A Photographer’s Life: 1990–2005 (2006), which contained many images documenting Leibovitz’s personal life; Annie Leibovitz at Work (2008); and Annie Leibovitz: Portraits 2005–2016 (2017). Leibovitz’s perfectionism in her work (budgets were exploded, and no expense was spared) and her celebrity-touched lifestyle had a role in producing a debt of $24 million, for which she was sued in 2009. The suit against her was settled, and the glare of publicity was deflected somewhat when her official portrait of the first family-U.S. Pres. Barack Obama, his wife, Michelle, and their daughters, Sasha and Malia-was released to the public later that year.

The photographer’s achievements were celebrated in Annie Leibovitz: Life Through a Lens (2009), a documentary film made for public television’s American Masters series by her sister Barbara. During her financial difficulties, Leibovitz began working on a personal project, photographing places and objects that were meaningful to her, and the images were collected in the book Pilgrimage (2011).…their brave warriors, such as ʿAntarah. Modern research, however, suggests that his story in its present setting belongs to the period of the Crusades. The Egyptian queen Shajar al-Durr (died 1250) and the first brave Mamluk ruler, Baybars I (died 1277), as well as the adventures of the Bedouin tribe…Anthony Hopkins (born December 31, 1937, Port Talbot, West Glamorgan, Wales) Welsh stage and film actor of burning intensity, often seen at his best when playing pathetic misfits or characters on the fringes of insanity.

Hopkins had early ambitions to be a concert pianist. He began acting at age 18 when he joined a YMCA dramatic club. He received a scholarship to the Cardiff College of Music and Drama, and he toured with the Arts Council as a stage manager and actor after his graduation. He then spent two years with the Royal Artillery. Upon his demobilization he resumed his acting career, making his professional debut in 1960. A self-described "actor of instinct," he gained needed training by enrolling at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in 1961 and graduated as a silver medalist two years later. He first appeared on the London stage in Lindsay Anderson’s production of Julius Caesar (1964). It was during this period that he appeared in his first film, the Anderson-directed short subject The White Bus (released in 1967).

Hopkins was accepted into Laurence Olivier’s National Theatre company in 1965, and he understudied Olivier in several productions before attracting critical attention with his performances as Edgar in August Strindberg’s The Dance of Death and as Andrey Prozorov in Anton Chekhov’s Three Sisters (both 1967). At last attracting the attention of the critics, he soon found himself being promoted as the "new Olivier," and it was during this initial burst of adulation that he landed the juicy role of Prince Richard the Lionheart in the 1968 film version of James Goldman’s play The Lion in Winter. In 1974 he enjoyed a double professional triumph when he starred in the American television miniseries QB VII and also played the role of Dr. Martin Dysart in the original Broadway production of Equus.

Despite years of promise and glowing reviews, Hopkins found his career impeded by his recalcitrant attitude and battles with alcoholism. After waking up in a Phoenix hotel room in 1975 and not being able to remember how he got there, Hopkins resolved to reform: "I led a pretty self-destructive life for a few decades. It was only after I put my demons behind me that I was able to fully enjoy acting." His career gained momentum, and his subsequent screen credits included acclaimed performances as a mentally unhinged ventriloquist in Magic (1978) and as Joseph Merrick’s doctor in The Elephant Man (1980), as well as sharply etched portrayals of two roles previously associated with Charles Laughton: Quasimodo in The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1982) and Captain Bligh in The Bounty (1984). During this period Hopkins won Emmy Awards for his performances as Bruno Richard Hauptmann in The Lindbergh Kidnapping Case (1976) and as Adolf Hitler in The Bunker (1981). In 1989 he made his West End stage debut in the musical drama M. Butterfly.

While critical acclaim has been lavished upon Hopkins’s rich, full-blooded characterizations of such real-life personalities as Yitzhak Rabin, John Quincy Adams, Richard M. Nixon, C.S. Lewis, and Pablo Picasso, the film role with which he is most identified, and for which he received an Academy Award, was that of the horrifyingly brilliant serial killer Hannibal ("the Cannibal") Lecter in The Silence of the Lambs (1991). He received subsequent Oscar nominations for his roles as a duty-bound butler in Remains of the Day (1993), as the 37th U.S. president in Nixon (1995), and as Adams in Amistad (1997). Other notable roles in the 1990s included 20th-century patriarchs in Howards End (1992), Legends of the Fall (1994), and Meet Joe Black (1998) as well as storied adventurers in Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1992) and The Mask of Zorro (1998).

Hopkins revived his celebrated portrayal of Hannibal Lecter in Hannibal (2001) and Red Dragon (2002) before leading the cast of a 2003 adaptation of Philip Roth’s novel The Human Stain. In 2005 he starred as a brilliant mathematician afflicted with mental illness in Proof and as a New Zealand motorcycle racer in The World’s Fastest Indian. After enlivening the legal thriller Fracture (2007), Hopkins appeared in several big-budget movies rooted in mythology, including Beowulf (2007; as King Hrothgar) and The Wolfman (2010).

Hopkins played the Norse god Odin in Thor (2011) and its sequels, Thor: The Dark World (2013) and Thor: Ragnarok (2017). He also starred in the kaleidoscopic drama 360 (2011) and as film director Alfred Hitchcock in Hitchcock (2012), which centred on the making of the classic suspense movie Psycho (1960). In the ensemble action comedy Red 2 (2013) Hopkins stole scenes as an eccentric nuclear scientist, and in the biblical drama Noah (2014) he dispensed wisdom to the title character as Methuselah. In 2015 he starred in the crime drama Solace, playing a doctor who is assisting in the hunt for a serial killer. After playing a string of villainous characters, Hopkins appeared in Transformers: The Last Knight in 2017. Hopkins later portrayed the eponymous hero in a televised adaptation (2018) of William Shakespeare’s King Lear.

Hopkins then starred as Benedict XVI in the Netflix film The Two Popes (2019), about the friendship between Benedict and the future Pope Francis. For his performance, Hopkins earned his fifth Oscar nomination. He garnered further acclaim-including his second Academy Award-for his portrayal of a man struggling with dementia in The Father (2020). In 2022 Hopkins appeared in several movies, including Armageddon Time, a coming-of-age tale that addresses issues of bigotry and privilege. His other notable credits included the HBO TV series Westworld (2016– ), a sci-fi thriller in which he was cast as the creator of an adult theme park featuring humanlike robots.

In addition to acting, Hopkins also wrote and directed the film August (1996) and the surreal Slipstream (2007). The former was adapted from Anton Chekhov’s play Uncle Vanya, and the latter followed an aging screenwriter as he encountered his characters in real life. Hopkins played the lead in both films.

For lifetime achievement, Hopkins received a Golden Globe Award (2006) and a British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) Award (2008). After being made Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1987, he was knighted in 1993.Antoine Galland  (born 1646, Rollot, near Montdidier, France-died  1715, Paris) French Orientalist and scholar, best known for his adaptation of the Middle Eastern tales Les Mille et une nuits (1704–17; The Thousand and One Nights).

The seventh child of a poor family, Galland was taught Hebrew, Latin, and Greek by canons and attended the College of Noyon and the Collège de France in Paris. He accompanied the French ambassador to Constantinople during 1670–75, learned Arabic, Persian, and Turkish, and wrote a journal of his travels.

In 1679 he was appointed antiquary to Louis XIV, for whom he collected ancient coins and manuscripts. In addition to his work on dictionaries and academic writings, he translated the Qurʾān and in 1694 wrote Les Paroles remarquables, les bons mots et les maximes des Orientaux (The Remarkable Sayings, Apothegms, and Maxims of the Eastern Nations), a compendium of Eastern wisdom, and Les Contes et fables indiennes de Bidpai et de Lokmam (1724; "Indian Fables and Tales of Bidpai and Lokmam"). His major work, Les Mille et une nuits, was a popular version freely translated from Syrian manuscripts.…Philip Rivers, and tight end Antonio Gates had great regular-season success-including four consecutive AFC West titles from 2006 to 2009-but failed to advance to the Super Bowl. Tomlinson was released in early 2010, and the Chargers’ streak of playoff berths ended the following season. The team returned to the postseason…António, prior of Crato (born 1531, Lisbon-died  Aug. 26, 1595, Paris) ecclesiastic and claimant to the throne of Portugal who never gained the crown despite armed assistance from France and England.

António was the illegitimate son of Luís, duke of Beja, brother of King John III of Portugal. He became head of the Order of St. John in Portugal and was endowed (1555) with the wealthy priory of Crato. He accompanied King Sebastian (reigned 1557–78), John III’s grandson, to North Africa, where, in the Battle of the Three Kings (1578), Sebastian was killed and António captured. On his return to Portugal, António’s claim to the throne was rejected by Sebastian’s successor Henry, the last surviving brother of John III, and later by the council that governed Portugal for some months after Henry’s death (January 1580). In June 1580 he was acclaimed king as António I at Santarém by his supporters. His possession of the crown, however, was contested by Philip II of Spain, whose army, under the Duke of Alba, defeated António outside Lisbon two months later. The Spanish king then became Philip I of Portugal, and António sought refuge in Paris.

With French help, António sent two naval expeditions (1582 and 1583) to the Azores, where he was still recognized as king. Both of his forces were defeated by Spanish squadrons. He next went to England, where he enlisted the assistance of Elizabeth I. An English fleet under Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Norris effected a landing near Lisbon in support of António in 1589, but the expedition proved a costly failure. Impoverished and in ill health, António returned to Paris, where he planned further expeditions until his death.Artuq ibn Ekseb, founder of the dynasty, was rewarded for his services to the Seljuq sultan with the grant of Palestine in 1086. Forced out of Palestine by the Fāṭimids of Egypt, Artuq’s descendant Muʿīn ad-Dīn Sökmen returned to Diyarbakır, where he took Ḥiṣn Kayfā…Asif Ali Zardari (born July 26, 1955, Karachi, Pakistan) is a former president of Pakistan (2008–13) who was the first to complete a full term in office. Since the December 2007 assassination of former prime minister Benazir Bhutto, his wife and the leader of the Pakistan People’s Party (PPP), he has been the de facto leader of the PPP. His son, Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, also plays a prominent role in the party as its chair.

Zardari-the son of Hakim Ali Zardari, a Sindhi landlord, businessman, and politician-was educated at Saint Patrick’s School in Karachi and later studied business in London. He gained a reputation as a playboy and gadfly for his easygoing lifestyle; an avid polo player and an intense competitor, Zardari demonstrated little interest in the political scene. His betrothal to Bhutto, who was the daughter of former president (1971–73) and prime minister (1973–77) Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and whom he had first met five days prior to the public announcement of their engagement, surprised many observers. On December 18, 1987, the two were married in an arranged and relatively simple ceremony, and they went on to have three children: a son, Bilawal, and two daughters, Bakhtwar and Aseefa.

The couple had been married less than a year when Pres. Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq was killed, ending more than a decade of military rule. Bhutto’s subsequent success at the polls ushered her into office as prime minister. In 1990 her tenure was cut short by corruption-related scandal, however, and both Zardari and his wife were the focus of attacks from opposition politicians as well as disgruntled members of the PPP, Bhutto’s own party. Arrested on kidnapping and extortion charges, Zardari was imprisoned in 1990, and, following his release in 1993, corruption allegations against him multiplied (some labeled him "Mr. Ten Percent," alleging he took kickbacks on large government contracts during Bhutto’s tenure in office).

Zardari served as a member of the National Assembly from 1990 to 1993-during which time he was periodically released from prison to attend sessions-and from 1993 to 1996. After Bhutto’s return to power in 1993, he served as minister of the environment (1993–96) and federal minister for investment (1995–96) in her government. Zardari aggressively sought control of the PPP, but he was the subject of ever-increasing criticism from opponents within and outside the party. In addition, Zardari was deeply involved in a Bhutto family feud led by Bhutto’s brother, Murtaza, and mother, Nusrat; the conflict between Zardari and Murtaza over leadership of the Bhutto clan ruptured the PPP and destabilized Bhutto’s government. The Murtaza-Zardari rivalry ended abruptly on September 20, 1996, when Murtaza was shot and killed by police.

Zardari was implicated in Murtaza’s death, and, following the second dissolution of Bhutto’s government in November 1996, he was arrested on charges that included corruption, money laundering, and murder. Although never convicted, Zardari was imprisoned from 1997 to 2004; he was elected to the Senate from his jail cell during this time. The toll exacted on Zardari’s health by his imprisonment was considerable. Following his release, Zardari sought medical treatment in the United States for psychological distress. He returned to Pakistan with Bhutto’s resumption of political activity in 2007 and was given amnesty for his alleged offenses. Following Bhutto’s death in December 2007, Zardari took on the reins of the PPP and made his college-aged son, Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, the nominal chairman.

In the parliamentary elections of February 2008, the PPP captured one-third of the available seats, while the party of former prime minister Nawaz Sharif won one-fourth of the seats. In March the two parties formed a coalition government. Although disagreements destabilized the administration in the months following its formation, in August 2008 Zardari and Sharif led the movement to impeach Pres. Pervez Musharraf. To avoid further public embarrassment, Musharraf resigned his office. Sharif and Zardari were not reconciled, however, and their sustained feuding ultimately caused Sharif to withdraw his party from the coalition. Zardari easily won the September 2008 presidential elections.

Friction between the two rivals intensified further in early 2009, when the Supreme Court voted to disqualify Sharif’s brother Shehbaz Sharif from his position as chief minister of the Punjab and to uphold a ban prohibiting Sharif himself from holding political office (the ban stemmed from his 2000 hijacking conviction). Sharif alleged that the court’s rulings were politically motivated and backed by Zardari. Meanwhile, the status of the Supreme Court judges dismissed under Musharraf who had yet to be reinstated-one of the issues that had undermined the Sharif-Zardari coalition-remained another major source of contention. Faced with the prospect of a Sharif-led protest in the capital, in March 2009 the government agreed to reinstate Chief Justice Iftikhar Mohammad Chaudhry and a number of other Supreme Court judges who had not yet been returned to their posts (Shehbaz Sharif was also returned to his position shortly thereafter). The move was seen as a political victory for Sharif and a significant concession on the part of Zardari, who is thought to have opposed Chaudhry’s return because of the possibility that the amnesty Zardari had enjoyed under Musharraf might be overturned. Indeed, in December 2009 the Pakistani Supreme Court ruled as unconstitutional the 2007 amnesty protecting politicians accused of corruption. Zardari was among the thousands of people affected by the ruling, which essentially reactivated cases against them.

Zardari’s term was marked by increased U.S. involvement in Pakistan. The United States had expanded its use of drone strikes in Pakistan to target Pashtun militants who were waging a guerrilla campaign against international forces and the Afghan government in the Afghanistan War. In 2011 the United States located and killed Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad not far from Pakistan’s premier military academy, striking a blow to Pakistan’s image internationally for its failure to capture the al-Qaeda leader.

Zardari also faced daunting domestic issues. An unusually heavy monsoon season in 2010 led to unprecedented flooding (see Pakistan floods of 2010) affecting some one-fourth of the country and leaving about 14 million people homeless and millions more susceptible to malnutrition and disease. Zardari was heavily criticized for the government’s poor response, particularly when he embarked on a scheduled tour of Europe instead of attending to the relief efforts. In 2011 controversy erupted over the extrajudicial killing of Salman Taseer, governor of Punjab, for his criticism of a blasphemy law implemented decades before under Zia-ul-Haq.

Low approval ratings led to the PPP losing legislative elections in 2013, and Zardari declined to run for a second term as president as a result. Still, he became the first president in Pakistan’s history to serve a full term.

Zardari continued to play a key role in the PPP in the years after his presidency. He left the country in 2015, however, amid tensions with the security establishment. Shortly after his return in late 2016, he announced his intention to contest the 2018 legislative elections, after which he entered the National Assembly as one of the leaders of the opposition. As a growing number of opposition figures were pursued on corruption charges, including Nawaz Sharif, Zardari himself was arrested in June 2019 and released on bail in December. He continued to face charges of money laundering, however, and his son, Bilawal, began taking on a greater role in party leadership. In 2023, as Pakistan geared up for its general elections set for February 2024, the PPP announced Bilawal as its candidate for prime minister and Zardari as its candidate for president.Audrey Hepburn (born May 4, 1929, Brussels, Belgium-died January 20, 1993, Tolochenaz, Switzerland) Belgian-born British actress known for her radiant beauty and style, her ability to project an air of sophistication tempered by a charming innocence, and her tireless efforts to aid children in need.

Her parents were the Dutch baroness Ella Van Heemstra and Joseph Victor Anthony Ruston, who later adopted the more aristocratic surname Hepburn-Ruston, believing himself to be descended from James Hepburn, 4th earl of Bothwell. Although born in Belgium, Audrey had British citizenship through her father and attended school in England as a child. In 1939, however, at the onset of World War II, her mother (Audrey’s father left the family when she was six years old) moved the child to the Netherlands, thinking that neutral country to be safer than England. Throughout World War II, Audrey endured hardships in Nazi-occupied Holland. She still managed to attend school and take ballet lessons, however. During this time her mother temporarily changed Audrey’s name to Edda Van Heemstra, worried that her birth name would reveal her British heritage. After the war, she continued to study ballet in Amsterdam and in London. During her early 20s, she studied acting and worked as a model and dancer. She also began to get some small film roles, credited as Audrey Hepburn.

While making a film in Monte-Carlo, Hepburn caught the eye of the French novelist Colette, who felt that Hepburn would be ideal for the title role in the stage adaptation of her novel Gigi. Despite her inexperience, Hepburn was cast, earning rave reviews when the play opened on Broadway in 1951. Her next project took her to Rome, where she starred in her first major American film, Roman Holiday (1953). As a young princess who exchanges the burden of royalty for a day of adventure and romance with a reporter (played by Gregory Peck), Hepburn demonstrated her ability to combine a regal bearing with a tomboyish winsomeness that utterly charmed audiences, and she won an Academy Award for best actress.

Hepburn returned to the stage early in 1954 as a water nymph in Ondine, costarring Mel Ferrer, whom she married later that year. She won a Tony Award for her performance, which turned out to be her last on Broadway. She continued to enchant movie audiences, however, in such light romantic comedies as Sabrina (1954; this role provided her first occasion to appear in designs by Hubert de Givenchy, with whose fashions she became identified) and Funny Face (1957), as well as in major dramatic pictures such as War and Peace (1956) and The Nun’s Story (1959).

By the 1960s, Hepburn had outgrown her ingenue image and begun playing more sophisticated and worldly, albeit often still vulnerable, characters, including the effervescent and mysterious Holly Golightly in Breakfast at Tiffany’s (1961), an adaptation of Truman Capote’s novella; a chic young widow caught up in a suspenseful Charade (1963), costarring Cary Grant; and a free-spirited woman involved in a difficult marriage in Two for the Road (1967). Her most controversial role was perhaps that of Eliza Doolittle in the motion picture musical My Fair Lady (1964). Although Hepburn gave an admirable performance as the Cockney flower girl who is transformed into an elegant lady, many viewers had trouble accepting Hepburn in a role they felt belonged to Julie Andrews, who had created the part onstage.

After appearing in the thriller Wait Until Dark (1967), Hepburn went into semiretirement. Having divorced Ferrer in 1968, she married a prominent Italian psychiatrist and chose to focus on her family rather than her career. She did not return to acting until 1976, when she costarred in the nostalgic love story Robin and Marian. She appeared in a few more films, and in 1988 she began a new career as a special goodwill ambassador for United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). She devoted herself to humanitarian work, visiting famine-stricken villages in Latin America, Africa, and Asia, until shortly before her death of cancer in 1993. Later that year she posthumously received the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

An icon of both fashion and Hollywood, Hepburn was the subject of numerous books and documentaries, the latter of which included Audrey (2020).…1779 by the French astronomer Augustin Darquier. Like other nebulae of its type, called planetary nebulae, it is a sphere of glowing gas thrown off by a central star. Seen from a great distance, such a sphere appears brighter at the edge than at the centre and thus takes on…Augustus Tolton,  (born April 1, 1854, Brush Creek, Ralls county, Missouri, U.S.-died July 9, 1897, Chicago, Illinois), American religious leader who is regarded as the first African American ordained as a priest in the Roman Catholic Church (see Researcher’s Note).

Tolton was born into slavery. His parents, Peter Paul and Martha Jane (née Chisley) Tolton, were baptized Catholics who had been granted permission to wed by the neighbouring Catholic families who owned them. At the outbreak of the American Civil War, Tolton’s father escaped enslavement to join the Union army and was subsequently killed in battle. Soon after Peter Paul’s escape, Tolton’s mother fled with her three children at night and, aided by a handful of Union soldiers, crossed the Mississippi River into Illinois. They soon settled in the town of Quincy, where they joined a Catholic church whose congregation largely consisted of German immigrants.

Tolton was encouraged by his mother to pursue an education. When he attempted to enter local schools, however, he faced harassment and discrimination by classmates and their parents, and his education in both public and private schools was limited. Discussions with his pastor, Father Peter McGirr, inspired Tolton to consider entering the priesthood, yet no American seminary would admit a Black student. Tolton was therefore tutored privately by local priests until St. Francis Solanus College (now Quincy University) admitted him in 1878 as a special student. In 1880, with the support of McGirr and other priests in Quincy, Tolton began studying for the priesthood at the Collegium Urbanum de Propaganda Fide in Rome. After six years of study, Tolton was ordained a priest on April 24, 1886.

Although there had been speculation that he would be sent on a mission to Africa, Tolton was assigned to the United States. He returned to the United States in July 1886, delivering his first mass at St. Benedict the Moor, a largely Black church in New York City, before returning to his hometown of Quincy as pastor at the mainly Black St. Joseph Church. In Quincy Tolton became such a popular preacher that he attracted some members of local white-mostly German or Irish-congregations; he therefore also faced discrimination from other local priests, who resented what they perceived as competition.

The St. Augustine Society, an African American Catholic charitable organization, contacted Tolton about moving to Chicago to help its members found a congregation. In late 1889 Rome granted Tolton a transfer to Chicago, where he became the city’s first African American priest and was granted jurisdiction by the archbishop over all of Chicago’s Black Catholics. At the beginning he ministered to a Black congregation that met in the basement of Old St. Mary’s Church. Through the combined efforts of Tolton and the St. Augustine Society, as well as a private gift, enough money was raised to build most of the structure for a church building, and in 1893 Tolton held mass in the new St. Monica Church on Chicago’s South Side. Tolton soon developed a national reputation as a minister and as a public speaker, yet he devoted the majority of the remainder of his life to his congregants, most of whom lived in poverty, and to the completion of St. Monica Church. He died shortly after succumbing to heatstroke.

Francis Cardinal George initiated the canonization process for Tolton in 2010, announcing the cause for canonization for sainthood. In 2019 Pope Francis advanced his cause for sainthood, elevating Tolton to "Venerable."Ayaan Hirsi Ali (born November 13, 1969, Mogadishu, Somalia) Somali-born Dutch American activist, writer, and politician best known for her contention that Islam is fundamentally incompatible with Western democratic values, especially those upholding the rights of women. Projecting her views most extensively through her internationally best-selling autobiographical books, she drew exuberant praise from her strongest advocates and threats of death from her strongest detractors.

Ayaan Hirsi Magan was born into a devout Somali Muslim family. Her father, Hirsi Magan Isse, was a political dissident who spent several years in jail. When he escaped into self-imposed exile in the mid-1970s, his family followed him from Somalia to Saudi Arabia, then briefly to Ethiopia, before settling in Kenya, where Ayaan spent most of her youth. Throughout her school years, Ayaan received a strict Muslim education, and, as a young girl, she underwent traditional Somali female genital cutting, ordered by her grandmother in keeping with her understanding of Islam. In 1992 Ayaan was married-against her will-to a distant cousin. While en route to join him in Canada, she fled to the Netherlands, where she applied successfully for political asylum; during the process she changed her name to Ayaan Hirsi Ali and adjusted her birth date to make it difficult for her family to find her.

In the Netherlands, Hirsi Ali studied political science at the State University of Leiden and graduated with a master’s degree in 2000. She then worked for the centre-left Labour Party (Partij van de Arbeid; PvdA) as a researcher on immigration issues. While with the party, she developed a reputation as a sharp critic both of Islam and of the Dutch government’s policies toward immigration and the integration of immigrants (especially Muslims) into Dutch society. She contended that Dutch laws were overly accommodating toward immigrants, enabling the formation of "backward" Muslim enclaves whose practices ultimately posed a threat to the country’s stability. In 2002 Hirsi Ali shifted her allegiance to the liberal People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (Volkspartij voor Vrijheid en Democratie; VVD), and she was elected to the parliament the following year.

As a legislator Hirsi Ali became an increasingly controversial figure, championing immigration reform while also fighting for the rights of Muslim women. In 2004 she worked with filmmaker Theo van Gogh to create Submission, a jarring, incendiary film depicting Islam as a religion that sanctions the abuse of women. Several weeks after the film aired on Dutch television, van Gogh was murdered-shot and stabbed, with a knife pinning to his body a letter that called for the death of Hirsi Ali also. Hirsi Ali left the parliament in 2006 following an announcement by the immigration minister that her Dutch citizenship was illegitimate on account of false statements she had made on her asylum and citizenship applications. While debate over her situation raged in the Netherlands, she traveled to the United States to promote her first book, The Caged Virgin (2006; originally published in Dutch, 2004), which criticizes Western countries’ failure to acknowledge and act upon oppression of women in Muslim societies.

Although she ultimately retained her Dutch citizenship, Hirsi Ali moved to the United States in the wake of the controversy; she became a U.S. citizen in 2013. In Washington, D.C., she was welcomed as a resident fellow by the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) for Public Policy Research, a conservative think tank, where she continued to study the relationship between Islam and the West and to condemn culturally and religiously rationalized violence against women. Within five years of her arrival in the United States, she published two more books, which address these issues through poignant accounts of the abuse and adversity she experienced as a Somali Muslim female, as an apostate, and as an internationally prominent critic of Islam. Like her earlier book, Infidel (2007) and Nomad (2010) became best sellers. Heretic: Why Islam Needs a Reformation Now (2015) also was successful. It was followed by Prey: Immigration, Islam, and the Erosion of Women’s Rights (2021). In 2007 she established the Philadelphia-based Ayaan Hirsi Ali (AHA) Foundation to help protect women in the West against militant Islam.…dedicated to the memory of Zubayr, one of the companions of the Prophet Muhammad who was killed in the Battle of the Camel (656), fought outside the town walls. Over the centuries the city of Basra moved progressively eastward in its search for water, each time abandoning the western quarters,…
Baldwin III (born 1129-died February 10, 1163, Beirut, kingdom of Jerusalem [now in Lebanon]) king of the Crusader state of Jerusalem (1143–63), military leader whose reputation among his contemporaries earned him the title of "ideal king."

The son of King Fulk of Jerusalem (reigned 1131–43) and Melisende (the daughter of Fulk’s predecessor, Baldwin II), Baldwin III and his mother were corulers from 1143 to 1151. During the period of their joint rule, the Latin colonies in Palestine were weakened by the failed Second Crusade from the West (1148).

In 1152 Baldwin, following his assumption of sole rule, had to suppress a civil war that broke out between his supporters and those of his mother. He intervened frequently in the affairs of the Christian states of Tripoli and Antioch and captured Ascalon from the Egyptian Fāṭimids in August 1153, but he failed to prevent the capture of Damascus by the Muslim leader Nureddin the following year. In 1158 Baldwin married Theodora Comnenus, niece of the Byzantine emperor Manuel I Comnenus. He and Manuel planned a joint attack against Nureddin, but it failed to materialize.

Baldwin III was highly respected by his contemporaries. Well-educated, he imposed his authority on his barons without resorting to force, and he avoided imposing oppressive taxes. His qualities gained him the love of his subjects and the esteem of his enemy Nureddin.Ben Okri,  (born March 15, 1959, Minna, Nigeria), Nigerian novelist, short-story writer, and poet who used magic realism to convey the social and political chaos in the country of his birth.

Okri attended Urhobo College in Warri, Nigeria, and the University of Essex in Colchester, England. His first novels, Flowers and Shadows (1980) and The Landscapes Within (1981), employ surrealistic images to depict the corruption and lunacy of a politically scarred country. The short-story collections Incidents at the Shrine (1986) and Stars of the New Curfew (1988) portray the essential link in Nigerian culture between the physical world and the world of the spirits.

Okri won the Booker Prize for his novel The Famished Road (1991), the story of Azaro, an abiku ("spirit child"), and his quest for identity. The novels Songs of Enchantment (1993) and Infinite Riches (1998) continue the themes of The Famished Road, relating stories of dangerous quests and the struggle for equanimity in an unstable land. Okri’s other novels included Astonishing the Gods (1995); Dangerous Love (1996), about "star-crossed" lovers in postcolonial Nigeria; In Arcadia (2002); Starbook (2007); The Age of Magic (2014); and The Freedom Artist (2019).

Okri’s other works included An African Elegy (1992), a collection of poems that urges Africans to overcome the forces of chaos within their countries, and the long poem Mental Flight (1999). Other volumes of poetry included Wild (2012), Rise Like Lions: Poetry for the Many (2018), and A Fire in My Head: Poems for the Dawn (2021). His short-story collections from this time included Prayer for the Living (2019). A Way of Being Free (1997) and A Time for New Dreams (2011) are collections of Okri’s essays. Although typically not overtly political, Okri’s works nevertheless convey clear and urgent messages about the need for Africans to reforge their identities.), vocalist and bassist Benjamin Orr (byname of Benjamin Orzechowski; b. September 8, 1947, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.-d. October 3, 2000, Atlanta, Georgia, U.S.), guitarist Elliot Easton (byname of Elliot Steinberg; b. December 18, 1953, Long Island, New York, U.S.), keyboardist Greg Hawkes (b.Bill France, Sr.,  (born September 26, 1909, Washington, D.C., U.S.-died June 7, 1992, Ormond Beach, Florida), American stock-car racer and executive who founded (1948) the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR). He is one of the most important figures in American racing history and is responsible for NASCAR’s initial survival and growth, as well as some of its controversial practices that continue to this day.

France became enamoured with racing as a youth, and he later owned and operated his own service station. In 1935 he moved his family to Daytona Beach, Florida-then the most popular site to attempt world land-speed records-and he immediately injected himself into the automotive scene. When most record seekers left Daytona behind for the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah, France and other promoters continued to stage races on the beach. France both raced in the events and promoted them, doing so until World War II. After the war, he stepped out of the car and focused on promotion.

However, recognizing that drivers were at the mercy of promoters, some of whom would leave events with gate receipts while the race was still running, France began thinking bigger. In connection with several other drivers, car owners, and mechanics, France formed the organization that would later become NASCAR at the Streamline Hotel in Daytona Beach in 1947.

Several years later, observing the success of tracks such as Darlington Raceway in South Carolina, France built a track at Daytona large enough to host the new series. Daytona International Speedway hosted its first Daytona 500 in 1959, and the 500 became one of the world’s preeminent racing events over the following years. Ten years after opening Daytona, France constructed Talladega Superspeedway in Alabama, another of NASCAR’s marquee tracks.

Serving as the first chairman and CEO of NASCAR, France, along with driver Junior Johnson, oversaw the introduction of the R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company into the sport, a move which resulted in the renaming of NASCAR’s Grand National Series to the Winston Cup in 1971 and increased the presence of sponsorship in NASCAR to an even greater extent; after several other changes, the series became the Sprint Cup Series in 2008.

While France’s methods helped spur NASCAR’s transformation from a Daytona beachfront series to an international phenomenon, he ran the sport the way he saw fit, which included such moves as steamrolling drivers who tried to unionize in the late 1960s. France also had a way of shaping both on- and off-track rules to best fit NASCAR, an approach that, to some extent, continued decades after France’s death as the sport remained in the hands of France’s descendants. For instance, he employed the catchall rule "actions detrimental to stock car racing" (which is still in use) to justify a wide range of authoritarian decisions, such as when Lee Petty ran in an unsanctioned "outlaw" event in 1950 and France subsequently removed all of his NASCAR points, costing Petty the championship.

Nevertheless, NASCAR continued to be a multibillion-dollar attraction largely because of France’s early efforts. He was a member of the NASCAR Hall of Fame’s inaugural class of 2010.Billie Jean King (born November 22, 1943, Long Beach, California, U.S.) American tennis player whose influence and playing style elevated the status of women’s professional tennis beginning in the late 1960s. In her career she won 39 major titles, competing in both singles and doubles.

King was athletically inclined from an early age. She first attracted international attention in 1961 by winning the Wimbledon doubles championship with Karen Hantz; theirs was the youngest team to win. She went on to capture a record 20 Wimbledon titles (singles 1966–68, 1972–73, and 1975; women’s doubles 1961–62, 1965, 1967–68, 1970–73, and 1979; mixed doubles 1967, 1971, and 1973–74), in addition to U.S. singles (1967, 1971–72, and 1974), French singles (1972), and the Australian title (1968); her Wimbledon record was tied by Martina Navratilova in 2003. She was perhaps one of the greatest doubles players in the history of tennis, winning 27 major titles. With her victories in 1967, she was the first woman since 1938 to sweep the U.S. and British singles, doubles, and mixed doubles titles in a single year.

King turned professional after 1968 and became the first woman athlete to win more than $100,000 in one season (1971). In 1973 she beat the aging Bobby Riggs in a much-publicized "Battle of the Sexes" match. The match set a record for the largest tennis audience and the largest purse awarded up to that time. She pushed relentlessly for the rights of women players, helped to form a separate women’s tour, and obtained financial backing from commercial sponsors. She was one of the founders and the first president (1974) of the Women’s Tennis Association.

King and her husband, Larry King (married 1965–87), were part of a group that founded World TeamTennis (WTT) in 1974. King served as the player-coach of the Philadelphia Freedoms, thus becoming one of the first women to coach professional male athletes. The WTT folded after 1978 because of financial losses, but King revived the competition in 1981. In that same year King admitted to having had a homosexual affair with her former secretary, who was suing King for material support. (Her secretary lost the lawsuit.) In so doing, King became the most prominent female athlete to have come out as a lesbian at that time, but she subsequently lost all her endorsement contracts as a result. After her divorce from Larry King, she publicly embraced her homosexuality and became an advocate for gay rights.

King retired from competitive tennis in 1984 and the same year became the first woman commissioner in professional sports in her position with the World TeamTennis League. She was inducted into the Women’s Sports Hall of Fame in 1980, the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 1987, and the National Women’s Hall of Fame in 1990. King remained active in tennis and since the mid-1990s served as coach for several Olympic and Federation Cup teams; in 2020 the Federation Cup was renamed the Billie Jean King Cup. The United States Tennis Association honoured King in August 2006, when it renamed the National Tennis Center, home of the U.S. Open, the Billie Jean King National Tennis Center. In 2009 King was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom. She published the autobiographies Billie Jean (1974; with Kim Chapin), The Autobiography of Billie Jean King (1982; with Frank Deford), and All In (2021; with Johnette Howard and Maryanne Vollers). Her other books included We Have Come a Long Way: The Story of Women’s Tennis (1988; with Cynthia Starr) and Pressure Is a Privilege: Lessons I’ve Learned from Life and the Battle of the Sexes (2008; with Christine Brennan).Billy Martin (born May 16, 1928, Berkeley, Calif., U.S.-died  Dec. 25, 1989, near Fenton, N.Y.) American professional baseball player and manager whose leadership transformed teams on the field, but whose outspokenness and pugnacity made him the centre of controversy.

At the age of 18 Martin began playing baseball in the minor leagues. He batted and threw right-handed and began playing for the American League New York Yankees in 1950, where he played mainly at second base. Not an outstanding player, he was, however, aggressive and a great player in crucial games, such as the 1952–53 World Series games won by the Yankees. After being traded to the Kansas City Athletics (later the Oakland Athletics) in 1957, he played with five different clubs up to 1961.

From 1962 to 1964 Martin was a scout for the American League Minnesota Twins, the last team he played for, and a coach (1965–67). He then managed the Twins to first place in their division (1969) but was fired by the owner for insubordination. Martin then managed the American League Detroit Tigers to second, first, and third place in their division (1971–73) but again was fired for differences with management. Managing the American League Texas Rangers (1973–75), Martin brought the team from last place in 1973 to second place in 1974 but was again fired in mid-season 1975 in a dispute with management over trading policy. He managed the New York Yankees in five separate periods over a number of years, winning the World Series in 1977. Martin’s volatility and frequent contretemps with principal Yankee owner George Steinbrenner resulted in his five firings (the last in 1988). From 1980 to 1982 Martin managed the Oakland Athletics, bringing the team from last place in 1979 to second place in 1980 and to first and second place in 1981 (the season was split because of a players’ strike).Bruce Frederick Cummings,  (born Sept. 7, 1889, Barnstaple, Devon, Eng.-died  Oct. 22, 1919, Gerard’s Cross, Buckinghamshire), English author who wrote The Journal of a Disappointed Man (1919), extracts from diaries that he had kept between 1903 and 1917. The book was immediately acclaimed upon publication, a few months before Cummings’ death, not only for providing a vivid insight into his passion for zoology and music but also as a poignant revelation of the sense of failure and thwarted ambitions of a sensitive yet objectively minded man.

Frail and shy, Cummings was determined by a childhood love of nature for a career as a naturalist. After years of private study he won a post at the British Museum of Natural History, which enabled him to abandon his journalism career, work that he found disagreeable. Posthumous books were Enjoying Life and Other Literary Remains (1919) and A Last Diary (1920).Buddha(Sanskrit: "Awakened One")      (born c. 6th–4th century bce, Lumbini, near Kapilavastu, Shakya republic, Kosala kingdom [now in Nepal]-died, Kusinara, Malla republic, Magadha kingdom [now Kasia, India]) the founder of Buddhism, one of the major religions and philosophical systems of southern and eastern Asia and of the world. Buddha is one of the many epithets of a teacher who lived in northern India sometime between the 6th and the 4th century before the Common Era.

His followers, known as Buddhists, propagated the religion that is known today as Buddhism. The title buddha was used by a number of religious groups in ancient India and had a range of meanings, but it came to be associated most strongly with the tradition of Buddhism and to mean an enlightened being, one who has awakened from the sleep of ignorance and achieved freedom from suffering. According to the various traditions of Buddhism, there have been buddhas in the past and there will be buddhas in the future. Some forms of Buddhism hold that there is only one buddha for each historical age; others hold that all beings will eventually become buddhas because they possess the buddha nature (tathagatagarbha).

All forms of Buddhism celebrate various events in the life of the Buddha Gautama, including his birth, enlightenment, and passage into nirvana. In some countries the three events are observed on the same day, which is called Wesak in Southeast Asia. In other regions the festivals are held on different days and incorporate a variety of rituals and practices. The birth of the Buddha is celebrated in April or May, depending upon the lunar date, in these countries. In Japan, which does not use a lunar calendar, the Buddha’s birth is celebrated on April 8. The celebration there has merged with a native Shintō ceremony into the flower festival known as Hanamatsuri.

The clan name of the historical figure referred to as the Buddha (whose life is known largely through legend) was Gautama (in Sanskrit) or Gotama (in Pali), and his given name was Siddhartha (Sanskrit: "he who achieves his aim") or Siddhattha (in Pali). He is frequently called Shakyamuni, "the sage of the Shakya clan." In Buddhist texts, he is most commonly addressed as Bhagavat (often translated as "Lord"), and he refers to himself as the Tathagata, which can mean either "one who has thus come" or "one who has thus gone." Information about his life derives largely from Buddhist texts, the earliest of which were not committed to writing until shortly before the beginning of the Common Era, several centuries after his death. The events of his life set forth in these texts cannot be regarded with confidence as historical, although his historical existence is accepted by scholars. He is said to have lived for 80 years, but there is considerable uncertainty concerning the date of his death. Traditional sources on the date of his death or, in the language of the tradition, "passage into nirvana," range from 2420 bce to 290 bce. Scholarship in the 20th century limited this range considerably, with opinion generally divided between those who placed his death about 480 bce and those who placed it as much as a century later.

The Buddha was born in Lumbini (Rummin-dei), near Kapilavastu (Kapilbastu) on the northern edge of the Ganges River basin, an area on the periphery of the civilization of North India, in what is today southern Nepal. Scholars speculate that during the late Vedic period the peoples of the region were organized into tribal republics, ruled by a council of elders or an elected leader; the grand palaces described in the traditional accounts of the life of the Buddha are not evident among the archaeological remains. It is unclear to what extent these groups at the periphery of the social order of the Ganges basin were incorporated into the caste system, but the Buddha’s family is said to have belonged to the warrior (Kshatriya) caste. The central Ganges basin was organized into some 16 city-states, ruled by kings, often at war with each other.

The rise of these cities of central India, with their courts and their commerce, brought social, political, and economic changes that are often identified as key factors in the rise of Buddhism and other religious movements of the 6th and 5th centuries bce. Buddhist texts identify a variety of itinerant teachers who attracted groups of disciples. Some of these taught forms of meditation, Yoga, and asceticism and set forth philosophical views, focusing often on the nature of the person and the question of whether human actions (karma) have future effects. Although the Buddha would become one of these teachers, Buddhists view him as quite different from the others. His place within the tradition, therefore, cannot be understood by focusing exclusively on the events of his life and times (even to the extent that they are available). Instead, he must be viewed within the context of Buddhist theories of time and history.

According to Buddhist doctrine, the universe is the product of karma, the law of the cause and effect of actions, according to which virtuous actions create pleasure in the future and nonvirtuous actions create pain. The beings of the universe are reborn without beginning in six realms: as gods, demigods, humans, animals, ghosts, and hell beings. The actions of these beings create not only their individual experiences but the domains in which they dwell. The cycle of rebirth, called samsara (literally "wandering"), is regarded as a domain of suffering, and the ultimate goal of Buddhist practice is to escape from that suffering. The means of escape remains unknown until, over the course of millions of lifetimes, a person perfects himself, ultimately gaining the power to discover the path out of samsara and then compassionately revealing that path to the world.

A person who has set out on the long journey to discover the path to freedom from suffering, and then to teach it to others, is called a bodhisattva. A person who has discovered that path, followed it to its end, and taught it to the world is called a buddha. Buddhas are not reborn after they die but enter a state beyond suffering called nirvana (literally "passing away"). Because buddhas appear so rarely over the course of time and because only they reveal the path to liberation (moksha) from suffering (dukkha), the appearance of a buddha in the world is considered a momentous event in the history of the universe.

The story of a particular buddha begins before his birth and extends beyond his death. It encompasses the millions of lives spent on the bodhisattva path before the achievement of buddhahood and the persistence of the buddha, in the form of both his teachings and his relics, after he has passed into nirvana. The historical Buddha is regarded as neither the first nor the last buddha to appear in the world. According to some traditions he is the 7th buddha; according to another he is the 25th; according to yet another he is the 4th. The next buddha, named Maitreya, will appear after Shakyamuni’s teachings and relics have disappeared from the world. The traditional accounts of the events in the life of the Buddha must be considered from this perspective.

Accounts of the life of the Buddha appear in many forms. Perhaps the earliest are those found in the collections of sutras (Pali: suttas), discourses traditionally attributed to the Buddha. In the sutras, the Buddha recounts individual events in his life that occurred from the time that he renounced his life as a prince until he achieved enlightenment six years later. Several accounts of his enlightenment also appear in the sutras. One Pali text, the Mahaparinibbana-sutta ("Discourse on the Final Nirvana"), describes the Buddha’s last days, his passage into nirvana, his funeral, and the distribution of his relics. Biographical accounts in the early sutras provide little detail about the Buddha’s birth and childhood, although some sutras contain a detailed account of the life of a prehistoric buddha, Vipashyin.

Another category of early Buddhist literature, the vinaya (concerned ostensibly with the rules of monastic discipline), contains accounts of numerous incidents from the Buddha’s life but rarely in the form of a continuous narrative; biographical sections that do occur often conclude with the conversion of one of his early disciples, Shariputra. While the sutras focus on the person of the Buddha (his previous lives, his practice of austerities, his enlightenment, and his passage into nirvana), the vinaya literature tends to emphasize his career as a teacher and the conversion of his early disciples. The sutras and vinaya texts, thus, reflect concerns with both the Buddha’s life and his teachings, concerns that often are interdependent; early biographical accounts appear in doctrinal discourses, and points of doctrine and places of pilgrimage are legitimated through their connection to the life of the Buddha.

Near the beginning of the Common Era, independent accounts of the life of the Buddha were composed. They do not recount his life from birth to death, often ending with his triumphant return to his native city of Kapilavastu (Pali: Kapilavatthu), which is said to have taken place either one year or six years after his enlightenment. The partial biographies add stories that were to become well-known, such as the child prince’s meditation under a rose-apple tree and his four momentous chariot rides outside the city.

These accounts typically make frequent reference to events from the previous lives of the Buddha. Indeed, collections of stories of the Buddha’s past lives, called Jatakas, form one of the early categories of Buddhist literature. Here, an event reminds the Buddha of an event in a past life. He relates that story in order to illustrate a moral maxim, and, returning to the present, he identifies various members of his audience as the present incarnations of characters in his past-life tale, with himself as the main character.

The Jataka stories (one Pali collection contains 547 of them) have remained among the most popular forms of Buddhist literature. They are the source of some 32 stone carvings at the 2nd-century bce stupa at Bharhut in northeastern Madhya Pradesh state; 15 stupa carvings depict the last life of the Buddha. Indeed, stone carvings in India provide an important source for identifying which events in the lives of the Buddha were considered most important by the community. The Jataka stories are also well-known beyond India; in Southeast Asia, the story of Prince Vessantara (the Buddha’s penultimate reincarnation)-who demonstrates his dedication to the virtue of charity by giving away his sacred elephant, his children, and finally his wife-is as well-known as that of his last lifetime.

Lives of the Buddha that trace events from his birth to his death appeared in the 2nd century ce. One of the most famous is the Sanskrit poem Buddhacharita ("Acts of the Buddha") by Ashvaghosa. Texts such as the Mulasarvastivada Vinaya (probably dating from the 4th or 5th century ce) attempt to gather the many stories of the Buddha into a single chronological account. The purpose of these biographies in many cases is less to detail the unique deeds of Shakyamuni’s life than to demonstrate the ways in which the events of his life conform to a pattern that all buddhas of the past have followed. According to some, all past buddhas had left the life of the householder after observing the four sights, all had practiced austerities, all had achieved enlightenment at Bodh Gaya, all had preached in the deer park at Sarnath, and so on.

The life of the Buddha was written and rewritten in India and across the Buddhist world, elements added and subtracted as necessary. Sites that became important pilgrimage places but that had not been mentioned in previous accounts would be retrospectively sanctified by the addition of a story about the Buddha’s presence there. Regions that Buddhism entered long after his death-such as Sri Lanka, Kashmir, and Burma (now Myanmar)-added narratives of his magical visitations to accounts of his life.

No single version of the life of the Buddha would be accepted by all Buddhist traditions. For more than a century, scholars have focused on the life of the Buddha, with the earliest investigations attempting to isolate and identify historical elements amid the many legends. Because of the centuries that had passed between the actual life and the composition of what might be termed a full biography, most scholars abandoned this line of inquiry as unfruitful. Instead they began to study the processes-social, political, institutional, and doctrinal-responsible for the regional differences among the narratives of the Buddha. The various uses made of the life of the Buddha are another topic of interest. In short, the efforts of scholars have shifted from an attempt to derive authentic information about the life of the Buddha to an effort to trace stages in and the motivations for the development of his biography.

It is important to reiterate that the motivation to create a single life of the Buddha, beginning with his previous births and ending with his passage into nirvana, occurred rather late in the history of Buddhism. Instead, the biographical tradition of the Buddha developed through the synthesis of a number of earlier and independent fragments. And biographies of the Buddha have continued to be composed over the centuries and around the world. During the modern period, for example, biographies have been written that seek to demythologize the Buddha and to emphasize his role in presaging modern ethical systems, social movements, or scientific discoveries. What follows is an account of the life of the Buddha that is well-known, yet synthetic, bringing together some of the more famous events from various accounts of his life, which often describe and interpret these events differently.Burchard I, the first recorded ancestor of the dynasty, was count of Zollern in the 11th century. In the third and fourth generation from him two lines were formed: that of Zollern-Hohenberg, extinct in all its branches by 1486, and that of the burgraves of…Callixtus III (born December 31, 1378, near Játiva, kingdom of Aragon [Spain]-died August 6, 1458, Rome [Italy]) pope from 1455 to 1458.

As a member of the Aragonese court, he reconciled King Alfonso V with Pope Martin V, who appointed Callixtus bishop of Valencia in 1429. Pope Eugenius IV made him a cardinal in 1444.

As a compromise between the influential Colonna and Orsini families of Rome, Borgia was chosen as pope on April 8, 1455, succeeding Pope Nicholas V. (He was thought unlikely to reign long, in view of his advanced age.) Callixtus made a Crusade to recover Constantinople (now Istanbul) from the Turks the first order of his pontificate, but he failed despite heroic efforts. He was successful, however, in raising a pontifical fleet that relieved many of the Aegean Islands.

The repulse of the Turks from Belgrade on August 6, 1456, was commemorated by Callixtus when he instituted the Feast of the Transfiguration (1457), ordering that it be observed on that day. His pontificate revised St. Joan of Arc’s trial by proclaiming her innocence. His personal life was blameless, but his nepotism was widely resented. Following the fashion of his time, he showered favours on his nephew Rodrigo Borgia, whom he made cardinal and generalissimo of the papal forces and who later became Pope Alexander VI (see also Borgia family). Callixtus was succeeded by Pope Pius II.Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf,  (born Nov. 2, 1739, Vienna, Austria-died  Oct. 24, 1799, Rothlhotta Castle, Neuhof, Bohemia [now Nové Dvory, Czech Republic]), violinist and composer of instrumental music and of light operas that established the form of the singspiel (a comic opera in the German language).

A brilliant child violinist, Ditters played regularly at the age of 12 in the orchestra of Prince von Sachsen-Hildburghausen and later in the orchestra of the Vienna opera. He became friendly with the composer Christoph Gluck and accompanied him in 1761 to Bologna, Italy. There Ditters gained considerable celebrity with his violin playing. In 1765 he became director of the orchestra of the bishop of Grosswardein and wrote for it his first opera, Amore in musica ("Love in Music"). His first oratorio, Isacco ("Isaac"), was also written during this time.

By 1770 Ditters was in the service of Count Schaffgotsch, prince-bishop of Breslau, at Johannisberg, Silesia, Prussia. There he composed 11 comic operas, among them Il viaggiatore americano (1770; "The American Traveler"), and an oratorio, Davidde penitente (1770; "Penitent David"). In 1773 he was ennobled by Empress Maria Theresa under the name Ditters von Dittersdorf to enable his appointment as Amtshauptmann (district administrator) of Freiwaldau. In about 1779 he formed a close friendship with Joseph Haydn, who directed five of his operas at Eszterháza, and from 1783 he played in string quartets in Vienna with W.A. Mozart (on at least one famous occasion joined by Haydn and Johann Vanhal, then a popular composer of string quartets). From this period onward his output was enormous. He produced the oratorio Giobbe (1786) and several operas, three of which, Doktor und Apotheker (1786; "Doctor and Apothecary"), Hieronymus Knicker (1789), and Das rote Käppchen (1790; "The Little Red Hood"), had great success. Doktor und Apotheker, in particular, became one of the classic examples of the German singspiel. He also wrote a large quantity of instrumental music, including about 120 symphonies and some 40 concerti. In 1795, following the bishop’s death, Ditters was dismissed with a small pension. Poor and broken in health, he accepted a post with Baron Ignaz von Stillfried at Rothlhotta Castle in Bohemia. On his deathbed he dictated his autobiography, which is of great interest to students of 18th-century music.

Ditters was one of the earliest composers of the Viennese Classical school. His symphonies, which are often of great interest, display many elements reminiscent of Haydn, including a pleasing wit, asymmetrical phrases, and folklike material. His violin concerti are worthy of study, and his concerti for harp, for flute, for harpsichord, for double bass, and for other instruments are performed and recorded. As an opera composer Ditters is chiefly remembered for his lighthearted and sometimes sentimental singspiels.Carl Jacobi (born December 10, 1804, Potsdam, Prussia [Germany]-died February 18, 1851, Berlin) German mathematician who, with Niels Henrik Abel of Norway, founded the theory of elliptic functions.

Jacobi was first tutored by an uncle, and, by the end of his first year at the Gymnasium (1816–17), he was ready to enter the University of Berlin. Because the university would not accept students younger than 16, he had to bide his time until 1821, yet, at the end of the 1823–24 academic year, he was qualified to teach mathematics, Greek, and Latin. With the submission of his doctoral dissertation and his conversion to Christianity, a position opened for him at the University of Berlin in 1825. The following year Jacobi became a professor of mathematics at the University of Königsberg. In 1844, for health reasons, he moved to Berlin, where he gave occasional lectures at the university. During the revolutionary upheavals of 1848, an injudicious speech cost Jacobi his stipend, though the University of Berlin eventually gave him a position. In 1851 Jacobi succumbed to influenza and smallpox.

Jacobi first became known through his work on elliptic functions, which gained the admiration of the Frenchman Adrien-Marie Legendre, one of the leading mathematicians of his day. Unaware of similar endeavours by the Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel, Jacobi formulated a theory of elliptic functions based on four theta functions. The quotients of the theta functions yield the three Jacobian elliptic functions: sn z, cn z, and dn z. His results in elliptic functions were published in Fundamenta Nova Theoriae Functionum Ellipticarum (1829; "New Foundations of the Theory of Elliptic Functions"). In 1832 he demonstrated that, just as elliptic functions can be obtained by inverting elliptic integrals, so too can hyperelliptic functions be obtained by inverting hyperelliptic integrals. This success led him to the formation of the theory of Abelian functions, which are complex functions of several variables.

Jacobi’s De Formatione et Proprietatibus Determinantium (1841; "Concerning the Structure and Properties of Determinants") made pioneering contributions to the theory of determinants. He invented the functional determinant (formed from the n2 differential coefficients of n given functions with n independent variables) that bears his name and has played an important part in many analytic investigations.

Jacobi carried out important research in partial differential equations of the first order and applied them to the differential equations of dynamics. His Vorlesungenüber Dynamik (1866; "Lectures on Dynamics") relates his work with differential equations and dynamics. The Hamilton-Jacobi equation now plays a significant role in the presentation of quantum mechanics.Carole King (born February 9, 1942, New York, New York, U.S.) American songwriter and singer (alto) who was one of the most prolific female musicians in the history of pop music.

King’s mother was the source of her early music education. While still in high school, King began arranging and composing music, and at age 15 she formed and sang in a vocal quartet called the Cosines. She studied briefly at Queens College before dropping out to marry Gerry Goffin in 1959 (divorced 1968), who abandoned his plans to become a chemist in order to write music with her. Together, Goffin and King began writing songs for Aldon Music in the confines of a cubicle near the Brill Building on Broadway, and they quickly became one of the most successful songwriter duos in the industry. Their first hit, "Will You Love Me Tomorrow" (1961; recorded by the Shirelles), became a number one single on the U.S. Hot 100 before King turned 19.

Over the next six years, King and Goffin composed hits with stunning regularity. Their other number one songs were "Take Good Care of My Baby" (1961; Bobby Vee), "The Loco-Motion" (1962; Little Eva), and "Go Away, Little Girl" (1962; Steve Lawrence). Other King and Goffin hits included "Up on the Roof" (1962; the Drifters), "One Fine Day" (1963; the Chiffons), "Don’t Bring Me Down" (1966; the Animals), and "(You Make Me Feel like) A Natural Woman" (1967; Aretha Franklin).

In 1968 King moved to Los Angeles, where she organized the group the City, which released one album (Now That Everything’s Been Said) but never gained commercial success. Thereafter King worked for a time with singer-songwriter James Taylor, playing piano and singing on the album Sweet Baby James (1970) and accompanying him on tour. Taylor’s version of King’s song "You’ve Got a Friend" eventually became a hit in the United States. With his encouragement, King fostered her own ability to perform solo, and her debut album, Writer, was released in 1970.

Not until a year later, however, did King capture national attention in the United States as a solo artist. Her album Tapestry, a collection of catchy melodies and engaging lyrics, held the number one spot on the Billboard album chart for 15 weeks; it remained a best seller for more than 300 weeks. Tapestry also earned King four Grammys; in addition to winning for album of the year, she received the awards for best song ("You’ve Got a Friend"), best single ("It’s Too Late"), and best female vocal performance. Other noteworthy numbers on the album included "I Feel the Earth Move" and "So Far Away."

King continued to release popular albums. Many were gold records, including Music (1971), Rhymes & Reasons (1972), Fantasy (1973), and Wrap Around Joy (1974). Her marriage to Charles Larkey, the bass player of the City, failed, and in 1977 she married her abusive manager, Rick Evers, who died of a drug overdose less than a year later. King married for a fourth time in 1982 (a marriage that also ended, in 1987) and gradually faded from the music scene, becoming involved in environmental causes in Idaho, where she made her home.

King’s musical career sparked back to life in 2007 when she reunited with Taylor for a performance at the Troubadour, a famed West Hollywood venue then celebrating its 50th anniversary. Following the release of a Live at the Troubadour CD and DVD in 2010, King and Taylor embarked on a Troubadour Reunion world tour. The reunion also prompted a 2011 feature-length documentary made for public television’s American Masters series, Troubadours: Carole King/James Taylor & The Rise of the Singer-Songwriter. Taking advantage of her resurgent popularity, King in 2011 released a holiday album, A Holiday Carole, produced by her daughter Louise Goffin. King’s memoir, A Natural Woman, was published in 2012. Two years later, Beautiful: The Carole King Musical, a look at her career as a singer-songwriter, began a lengthy run on Broadway, and it opened in London’s West End in 2015. King performed all the songs, in order, from her album Tapestry in London’s Hyde Park in 2016, and the CD/DVD Tapestry: Live at Hyde Park was released the following year.

King was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987, and in 2002 she received the Johnny Mercer Award for her "history of outstanding creative works." She and Goffin were awarded the National Academy of Songwriters Lifetime Achievement Award in 1988, and two years later they were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as nonperformers. In 2013 she was awarded the Library of Congress Gershwin Prize for Popular Song as well as a Grammy Award for lifetime achievement, and she was named a Kennedy Center honoree in 2015. King was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a performer in 2021.Carrie Chapman Catt (born January 9, 1859, Ripon, Wisconsin, U.S.-died March 9, 1947, New Rochelle, New York) American feminist leader who led the women’s rights movement for more than 25 years, culminating in the adoption of the Nineteenth Amendment (for women’s suffrage) to the U.S. Constitution in 1920.

Carrie Lane grew up in Ripon, Wisconsin, and from 1866 in Charles City, Iowa. She worked her way through Iowa State College (now University), graduated in 1880, and after a short time spent reading law became a high-school principal in Mason City, Iowa, in 1881. Two years later she was appointed superintendent of schools, one of the first women to hold such a position. Her first marriage (1884), to Leo Chapman, an editor, ended with his untimely death in 1886. From 1887 to 1890 she devoted herself to organizing the Iowa Woman Suffrage Association. Her marriage to George W. Catt, an engineer, in 1890, was unusual in its prenuptial legal contract providing her with four months of free time each year to work exclusively for women’s suffrage. George Catt encouraged and supported his wife’s dedication until his death, in 1905, at which time he left her financially independent to devote the rest of her life to reform activities.

As an organizer, Catt was highly effective. In 1900 she was elected to succeed Susan B. Anthony as president of the National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA). She resigned the presidency in 1904 to care for her ailing husband. Between 1905 and 1915 Catt reorganized the NAWSA along political-district lines. By then an accomplished public speaker, she served as the group’s president from 1915 until her death. In the meantime, she trained women for direct political action and marshaled seasoned campaigners.

Buoyed by the nearly $1 million bequest of Miriam Leslie, the organization adopted Catt’s "Winning Plan" and opened a massive drive for a constitutional amendment to provide national women’s suffrage. The success of a second New York state referendum in 1917, followed by Pres. Woodrow Wilson’s conversion to the cause of suffrage in 1918 attested the effectiveness of Catt’s flexible strategy of working at both federal and state levels to build support for women’s suffrage. Tireless lobbying in Congress (directed by Maud Wood Park) and then in state legislatures finally produced a ratified Nineteenth Amendment in August 1920. The final triumph was in large part a tribute to Catt’s imaginative and tactful leadership. After its adoption, she reorganized the suffrage association-two million strong-into the League of Women Voters in order to work for continuing progressive legislation throughout the nation.

In the 1920s Catt embraced the peace movement, enlisting the cooperation of 11 national women’s organizations in the Committee on the Cause and Cure of War (1925) to urge United States participation in a world organization for peace. She actively supported the League of Nations, relief for Jewish refugees from Germany, and a child labour amendment. She was also a strong advocate of international disarmament and of prohibition. Following World War II, she was keenly interested in the United Nations and used her influence to have qualified women placed on certain commissions.

Catt’s works included Woman Suffrage and Politics: The Inner Story of the Suffrage Movement (1923, written with Nettie Rogers Shuler) and, with others, Why Wars Must Cease (1935).…1889 through 1897, Camp and Caspar Whitney collaborated in choosing the annual All-America football team, an idea that seems to have originated with Whitney. From 1898 through 1924, the teams were announced in the magazine Collier’s under the name of Camp alone. On his death he was succeeded as All-America…Catharine Macaulay,  (born April 2, 1731, Wye, Kent, Eng.-died June 22, 1791, Binfield, near Windsor, Berkshire), British historian and radical political writer.

She was privately educated, and her readings in Greek and Roman history inculcated in her an enthusiasm for libertarian and republican ideals. Following her marriage to the Scottish physician George Macaulay in 1760, she began her History of England from the Accession of James I to That of the Brunswick Line, published in eight volumes between 1763 and 1783, in which she championed the Parliamentary cause, condemned Oliver Cromwell as a tyrant, and found her own republican ideals reflected in the parliamentarian John Hampden. The History was widely read in spite of the controversies generated by its clear republican sympathies.

Widowed in 1766, she moved in 1774 to Bath, where she attracted many admirers. In addition to espousing popular sovereignty and the moderate distribution of land in her works, Macaulay also took up the cause of the American colonists by attacking the Quebec Act and British colonial taxation in her Address to the People of England, Scotland and Ireland (1775). On a visit to Paris at the peak of her fame in 1777, she met Jacques Turgot and Benjamin Franklin; but her marriage the following year to William Graham, the 21-year-old brother of a quack physician, disgraced her in some circles. Nevertheless, on a trip to America in 1784–85, she and her husband were guests of George Washington at Mount Vernon. Her last political tract, Observations on the Reflections of The Right Hon. Edmund Burke on the Revolution in France (1790), defended the French Revolution, finding the unicameral National Assembly superior even to the American polity.Cesare Lombroso,  (born Nov. 6, 1835, Verona, Austrian Empire [now in Italy]-died  Oct. 19, 1909, Turin, Italy), Italian criminologist whose views, though now largely discredited, brought about a shift in criminology from a legalistic preoccupation with crime to a scientific study of criminals.

Lombroso studied at the universities of Padua, Vienna, and Paris, and from 1862 to 1876 he was professor of psychiatry at the University of Pavia. In 1871 he became director of the mental asylum at Pesaro, and in 1876 he became professor of forensic medicine and hygiene at the University of Turin, where he subsequently held appointments as professor of psychiatry (1896) and then of criminal anthropology (1906).

Lombroso tried to discern a possible relationship between criminal psychopathology and physical or constitutional defects. His chief contention was the existence of a hereditary, or atavistic, class of criminals who are in effect biological throwbacks to a more primitive stage of human evolution. Lombroso contended that such criminals exhibit a higher percentage of physical and mental anomalies than do noncriminals. Among these anomalies, which he termed stigmata, were various unusual skull sizes and asymmetries of the facial bones. Lombroso’s theories were widely influential in Europe for a time, but his emphasis on hereditary causes of crime was later strongly rejected in favour of environmental factors. Lombroso tried to reform the Italian penal system, and he encouraged more humane and constructive treatment of convicts through the use of work programs intended to make them more productive members of society. Among his books are L’uomo delinquente (1876; "The Criminal Man") and Le Crime, causes et remèdes (1899; Crime, Its Causes and Remedies).…invented by Bavarian-born American inventor Charles August Fey, at the time a mechanic in San Francisco, who built his first coin-operated gambling machine in 1894. The following year Fey built the 4-11-44 in his basement; it proved so successful at a local saloon that he soon quit his job and…Charles Delescluze,  (born October 2, 1809, Dreux, France-died May 25, 1871, Paris), French revolutionary figure who participated in the uprisings of 1830 and 1848 and who was an important leader in the Paris Commune (1871).

Delescluze, an ardent radical republican, was still a student during the popular uprisings of 1830. As an activist in the secret republican society Amis du Peuple (Friends of the People), he was implicated in an abortive attempt to assassinate King Louis-Philippe (1832) and was forced to flee to Brussels, where he remained until 1841.

Upon his return to France, Delescluze settled in Valenciennes and edited a radical journal, L’Impartial du Nord ("The Impartial of the North"). When the July Monarchy fell in 1848, he was active in the revolutionary movements in the north. He went to Paris soon after and founded the journal La Révolution Démocratique et Sociale, which he used as a forum for attacks on Louis-Napoléon. Implicated in the radical uprising of June 13, 1849, he again became an exile, this time in England. He slipped back into France in 1853 but was arrested and sent to the prison colony in French Guiana. He recorded these experiences in De Paris à Cayenne, journal d’un transporté (1869; "From Paris to Cayenne, Journal of a Convict").

After his release from prison Delescluze continued his journalistic attacks on the Second Empire. He escaped a brief imprisonment and, after the emperor abdicated in 1870, was elected to the new National Assembly of 1871. Inspired by the revolt of the Paris Commune of 1871, Delescluze was quick to join it. After heroic but fruitless attempts to sustain the revolt, he was killed on the barricades.Sir Charles Eliot (born Jan. 8, 1862, Sibford Gower, Oxfordshire, Eng.-died  March 16, 1931, at sea, in the Strait of Malacca) diplomat and colonial administrator who initiated the policy of white supremacy in the British East Africa Protectorate (now Kenya).

A scholar and linguist, Eliot served in diplomatic posts in Russia (1885), Morocco (1892), Turkey (1893), and Washington, D.C. (1899). In 1900 he was knighted and appointed commissioner and consul general for the East Africa Protectorate. He collaborated with the farmers there (notably Lord Delamere, to whom he ceded 100,000 acres [40,500 hectares] of land) and encouraged European immigration by the wholesale award of land concessions to European settlers.

By 1903 he was encountering opposition from the Colonial Office, which felt he was proceeding too rapidly. In 1904, after being criticized for granting a concession on land previously reserved for the indigenous Maasai people, he resigned his position. Following his resignation, he served as vice chancellor of both the University of Sheffield (1905–12) and the University of Hong Kong (1912–18). His last diplomatic post was as the British ambassador to Japan, which he began in 1920. He retired in 1926, continuing to live in Japan. During his life he wrote several papers and books, including The East Africa Protectorate (1905) and Letters from the Far East (1907).Charles Frederick Mackenzie,  (born April 10, 1825, Portmore, Peebles, Scot.-died  Jan. 31, 1862, Malo Island, Portuguese East Africa), Scottish-born Anglican priest and the first bishop in the British colonial territory of Central Africa.

Mackenzie went to Africa in 1854 as archdeacon to Bishop John Colenso of Natal. There he aroused opposition among English settlers by obeying the bishop’s order to wear a surplice and sharing the bishop’s desire that African Christians participate in full equality with white Christians in all church affairs.

Illness forced Mackenzie to return to England in 1859, but, at the behest of the Universities Mission to South Africa, he returned to Africa and headed its mission in the Zambezi River region the following year, being consecrated bishop on New Year’s Day, 1861. Settling at Magomero (in modern Malâwi), Mackenzie worked for a year in the Manganja tribal territory despite constant illness, breakdowns in communications and supply lines, and involvements in local tribal warfare.Sir Charles Hallé,  (born April 11, 1819, Hagen, Westphalia [Germany]-died October 25, 1895, Manchester, England), German-born British pianist and conductor, founder of the famed Hallé Orchestra.

Hallé studied at Darmstadt and in Paris, where he became friendly with Frédéric Chopin, Franz Liszt, and Hector Berlioz. He gave chamber concerts in Paris, but during the Revolution of 1848 he fled to England, settling in Manchester as a pianist and teacher. In 1849 he became conductor of the Gentlemen’s Concerts there. He began to give regular concerts in 1858 with an orchestra he had formed for the Art Treasures Exhibition the previous year. This was the beginning of the Hallé Orchestra, which he conducted until his death and which became one of Britain’s premier instrumental ensembles; it performed throughout the country and around the world into the 21st century. In 1893 the Royal Manchester College of Music was founded, largely through his efforts, and Hallé served as its first principal. He also gave frequent piano recitals in London and was knighted in 1888.Charles Proteus Steinmetz,  (born April 9, 1865, Breslau, Prussia-died  Oct. 26, 1923, Schenectady, N.Y., U.S.), German-born American electrical engineer whose ideas on alternating current systems helped inaugurate the electrical era in the United States.

At birth Steinmetz was afflicted with a physical deformity, hunchback, and as a youth he showed an unusual capability in mathematics, physics, and classical literature. On graduating from the gymnasium with honours, he entered the University of Breslau in 1883. There he joined a student socialist club, which was banned by the government after becoming affiliated with the German Social Democrats. When some of his fellow party members were arrested, Steinmetz took over the editorship of the party newspaper, "The People’s Voice." One of the articles he wrote was considered inflammatory; the police began a crackdown on the paper, and Steinmetz had to flee Breslau (1888). After a short stay in Zürich he immigrated to the United States in 1889, traveling by steerage. He soon obtained a job with a small electrical firm owned by Rudolf Eickemeyer in Yonkers, N.Y. At about the same time, Steinmetz Americanized his first name to Charles and substituted Proteus, a university nickname, for his two middle names.

Under the tutelage of his employer, Steinmetz became increasingly absorbed in the practical aspects of electrical engineering. He established a small laboratory at the factory, where he did much of his scientific research. Steinmetz’ experiments on power losses in the magnetic materials used in electrical machinery led to his first important work, the law of hysteresis. This law deals with the power loss that occurs in all electrical devices when magnetic action is converted to unusable heat. Until that time the power losses in motors, generators, transformers, and other electrically powered machines could be known only after they were built. Once Steinmetz had found the law governing hysteresis loss, engineers could calculate and minimize losses of electric power due to magnetism in their designs before starting the construction of such machines.

In 1892 Steinmetz gave two papers before the American Institute of Electrical Engineers on his new law concerning hysteresis loss. His work was immediately recognized as a classic by the few who understood it, and the constant he calculated for this loss has remained a part of electrical engineering vocabulary. Thus, Steinmetz’ reputation was assured at the age of 27.

His second contribution was a practical method for making calculations concerning alternating current circuits. This method was an example of using mathematical aids for engineering the design of machinery and power lines, so that the performance of the electrical system could be predicted in advance without the necessity of going through the expensive and uncertain process of building the system first and then testing it for its efficiency. Steinmetz developed a symbolic method of calculating alternating-current phenomena and in so doing simplified an extremely complicated and barely understood field so that the average engineer could work with alternating current. This accomplishment was largely responsible for the rapid progress made in the commercial introduction of alternating-current apparatus.

Steinmetz’ method of calculation was presented to an uncomprehending audience at the International Electrical Congress in 1893. His book Theory and Calculation of Alternating Current Phenomena (coauthored with Ernst J. Berg in 1897) was read and understood by only a very few. The problem that Steinmetz faced was that electrical engineers were not taught enough mathematics to understand his new mathematical treatment of problems using complex numbers. To educate the electrical engineering profession, he published several textbooks, including Engineering Mathematics (1911), and expanded his original 1897 book into three separate volumes. Gradually, through his writing, lecturing, and teaching, his method of calculation with complex numbers was universally adopted in work with alternating currents.

In 1893 the newly formed General Electric Company purchased Eickemeyer’s company, primarily for his patents, but Steinmetz was considered one of its major assets. At General Electric, Steinmetz gained an expanded opportunity for research and implementation of his ideas. He was assigned to the new calculating department, the first job of which was to work on the company’s proposal for building the generators at the new Niagara Falls power station. In 1894 the General Electric Company transferred its operations to Schenectady, N.Y., and Steinmetz was made head of the calculating department. He at once began to indoctrinate the engineers with his method of calculating alternating-current circuits.

Steinmetz’ third major scientific achievement was in the study and theory of electrical transients-that is, changes in electrical circuits of very short duration. A prime example of this phenomenon is lightning, and Steinmetz’ investigation of lightning phenomena resulted in his theory of traveling waves and opened the way for his development of devices to protect high-power transmission lines from lightning bolts. In the course of this work he also designed a generator that produced a discharge of 10,000 amperes and more than 100,000 volts, equivalent to a power of more than 1,000,000 horsepower for 1/100,000 of a second. This was his last major project at the General Electric Company, where he had become head of the engineering consulting department.

In his later years Steinmetz also engaged in public affairs to a considerable degree, serving as president of the Board of Education of Schenectady, N.Y., and as president of the city council. He served as president of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers in 1901–02.Charles Simonyi,  (born September 10, 1948, Budapest, Hungary), Hungarian-born American software executive and space tourist.

Simonyi left Hungary in 1966 to work at the Danish computer company Regnecentralen. He graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, with a degree in engineering mathematics and later earned a doctorate in computer science from Stanford University. After working at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (Xerox PARC)-where he created the first WYSIWYG (what you see is what you get) text editor-from 1972 to 1980, Simonyi joined the Microsoft Corporation in 1981. While at Microsoft he led the development of the widely used software applications Microsoft Word and Microsoft Excel. In 2002 he left Microsoft to found his own firm, Intentional Software. However, he returned in 2017 after selling the company to Microsoft.

In 2007, for the price of $20 million, Simonyi become the fifth paying traveler sent into space by the American space tourism company Space Adventures, Ltd. After a six-month training program at the Yury Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre in Star City, Russia, Simonyi was launched into space from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan aboard Soyuz TMA-10 on April 7, 2007, with two Russian cosmonauts, Expedition 15 commander Fyodor Yurchikhin and flight engineer Oleg Kotov. On April 9 he arrived at the International Space Station (ISS), where he spent 11 days performing scientific experiments and communicating via amateur radio with high school students. He returned to Earth aboard Soyuz TMA-9, landing in the Kazakhstan steppes on April 21.

On March 26, 2009, he lifted off with Russian cosmonaut Gennady Padalka and U.S. astronaut Michael Barratt aboard Soyuz TMA-14, a flight to the ISS that made Simonyi the first repeat space tourist. They returned to Earth on April 8, traveling on Soyuz TMA-13.Charles Tilstone Beke,  (born Oct. 10, 1800, Stepney [now in Greater London]-died  July 31, 1874, Bromley, Kent [now in Greater London]), English biblical scholar, geographer, and businessman who played an important role in the final phase of the discovery of the sources of the Nile River.

After beginning a business career (1820), Beke turned to the study of law. His interest in ancient and biblical history led him to publish Origines Biblicae, or Researches in Primeval History (1834), which examined history in the light of geological principles. In 1840 Beke went to Ethiopia to explore the area, establish commercial relations with the inhabitants, and help abolish the slave trade. His commercial venture was unsuccessful, but he ascertained the approximate course of the Blue Nile, mapped about 70,000 square miles (180,000 square km) of the country, and also compiled vocabularies of 14 Ethiopian dialects. In 1845 he sponsored an expedition that tried to explore the sources of the White Nile from the East African coast. This venture, though uncompleted, may have inspired the Nile explorations of John Hanning Speke of England in the 1850s.

Beke traveled through Syria, Palestine, and Egypt (1861–62) and returned to Ethiopia in 1865, where his knowledge of the interior proved valuable to the British mission of 1868, which had been sent to secure release of the imprisoned consul and other British subjects. In 1873 he went in search of the true Mount Sinai, which he thought to be at the head of the Gulf of Aqaba. Among his writings were An Essay on the Nile and Its Tributaries (1847) and The Sources of the Nile (1860).…with Sully, about airline pilot Chesley ("Sully") Sullenberger (played by Tom Hanks), who landed a malfunctioning commercial jet on the Hudson River. The docudrama recounts both the emergency landing and the ensuing investigation into Sullenberger’s handling of the event.
Christian I,  (born 1426-died  May 21, 1481, Copenhagen, Den.) king of Denmark (1448–81), Norway (1450–81), and Sweden (1457–64, 1465–67), and founder of the Oldenburg dynasty, which ruled Denmark until 1863. He tried to gain control over Sweden and maintain a union of the Scandinavian nations but was defeated by rebellious Swedish nobles (1471).

The son of Count Dietrich the Happy of Oldenburg and Hedvig of Holstein, Christian was elected to succeed Christopher III, king of Denmark and Norway, by the Danish Rigsråd (state council) in 1448. The following year he married his predecessor’s widow, Queen Dorothea of Hohenzollern. The decision of a meeting of the Danish and Swedish councils at Halmstad, Swed. (1450), recognizing Christian as king of Norway and heir in Sweden was disputed by the Swedish king Charles VIII, touching off a Danish-Swedish war (1451–57). After Charles was finally deposed in 1457, Christian held the Swedish throne until 1464, when he was overthrown by a group of the higher Swedish nobility. He held the throne again in 1465–67. His last full-scale attempt to gain sovereignty over Sweden was ended by his defeat at Brunkeberg, near Stockholm (1471), by forces led by the Swedish nobleman Sten Sture the Elder.

Christian gained control over both Schleswig (now split between Denmark and Germany) and Holstein (now in Germany) in 1460, at the time that the Schleswig ducal line died out. He offset the growing opposition of the Danish nobility by calling a meeting of the Danish estates (1468), a precedent followed by his immediate successors. Financially weak because of his wars against Sweden and land purchases in Schleswig and Holstein, Christian became dependent on the Hanseatic League, a north German trading confederation, and granted the league generous commercial privileges. He was drawn into a war with England (1469–74) when the Hanseatic traders challenged English trading rights in Iceland.

In 1469, when Christian’s daughter Margaret was married to James III, king of Scotland, the Norwegian-controlled Orkney and Shetland islands were mortgaged to Scotland to help pay for Margaret’s dowry, and the annual rent Scotland paid for the Hebrides Islands and the Isle of Man was cancelled. Christian concluded a concordat with Pope Sixtus IV, improving his relations with the Danish Church. After visiting Rome (1474) he obtained a papal bull (1475) for a university, which he founded at Copenhagen in 1479.Christian Johansson (born May 20, 1817, Stockholm, Sweden-died December 12 [December 25, New Style], 1903, St. Petersburg, Russia) Swedish-born ballet dancer and principal teacher at the Imperial Ballet School in St. Petersburg, who made a fundamental contribution to the development of the Russian style of classical ballet.

Johansson received his basic dance training in the ballet school of the Royal Opera in Stockholm, graduating shortly after Anders Selinder, the first Swedish-born choreographer of note, was appointed ballet master there. In 1836, soon after making his debut, Johansson was sent to Copenhagen to finish his training under August Bournonville, whose approach derived from the pure French school of Gaétan and Auguste Vestris and Pierre Gardel. Between 1836 and 1839 he danced in both Stockholm and Copenhagen; in the former city in 1841 he partnered Marie Taglioni in La Sylphide during her brief visit as guest artist. That was to be the turning point in his career. Learning that Taglioni was proceeding to St. Petersburg, he resolved to follow her in the hope of securing an engagement. He managed to obtain permission to attend classes at the Imperial Ballet School, where he came to the notice of the ballet master, Antoine Titus, and made useful contacts that led to a debut and his being engaged at the Imperial Russian Ballet.

From that moment he was to devote his life to the Russian ballet. During a long and distinguished dancing career he partnered not only principal Russian ballerinas such as Yelena Andreyanova and Olga Schlefokht, but also many of the visiting ballerinas from western Europe-Marie Taglioni, Fanny Elssler, Carlotta Grisi, Fanny Cerrito, and Amalia Ferraris. In his prime his innate nobility and grace were unsurpassed. His technique always remained impeccably correct and precise, even if, to Russian eyes, the turnout of his feet at times appeared a trifle exaggerated.

In 1860, when his dancing skill was waning, he turned his attention to teaching and began to give classes at the Ballet School, although he would not be officially enrolled on its staff until 1869. The part he played over the next four decades in laying the foundations of the golden age of Russian ballet under Marius Petipa was to be fundamental. He brought a new polish to the Russian style, providing it with a firm base in the method that he had himself learned from Bournonville. Few teachers have been held in such affection and esteem as he. Throughout his service, he enjoyed the fullest support of Petipa, but his pupils were the source of his strength. In his 80s he would still climb the three flights of stairs to the classroom, clutching his precious violin, and at the very sight of his class he would be miraculously reinvigorated. His students affectionately called him Methuselah. By the time he retired, in 1902, he had produced an incredible galaxy of talent, including the Legat brothers, Sergey and Nicholas, and the ballerinas Praskoviya Lebedeva, Mathilde Kschessinska, Olga Preobrajenska, Anna Pavlova, and Tamara Karsavina.Cleo Laine,  (born October 28, 1927, Southall, Middlesex, England), British singer and actress who mastered a variety of styles but was best known as the "Queen of Jazz."

Laine was born to a Jamaican father and an English mother. She quit school at age 14 and took a variety of jobs while auditioning for singing jobs. Her first break came in 1951, when she was hired as a vocalist for the Johnny Dankworth Seven, a well-known jazz group. At that point she adopted the simpler name "Cleo Laine." In her seven years dedicated solely to performing with Dankworth’s band, she gained a large following and also began to record. In 1958, the year she married Dankworth (died 2010), she took her first theatrical role, in Flesh to a Tiger, set in Jamaica. Her success in the part led her to take on a number of other acting roles throughout the years, and she was a regular on the weekly BBC television satire That Was the Week That Was.

In the meantime, Laine continued to stretch herself as a singer, presenting lieder, classic blues, contemporary pop music, and even works by Arnold Schoenberg in her concerts; she was the only singer to receive Grammy Award  nominations in jazz, popular, and classical categories. In 1986 she won a Grammy for best female jazz vocal performance (for the album Cleo at Carnegie: The 10th Anniversary Concert; 1985). Laine continued to record and perform into the early 21st century. In addition, she performed in plays by Euripides, William Shakespeare, and Henrik Ibsen and took part in musical theatre, notably (1988–89) in Stephen Sondheim’s Into the Woods. She appeared in several movies, including the comedy The Last of the Blonde Bombshells (2000).

In 1969 Laine and Dankworth founded Wavendon AllMusic Plan, a charity that sought to make music more accessible. She was made Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 1977 and was elevated to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 1997 Queen’s Birthday Honours List.  She wrote the autobiographies Cleo (1994) and You Can Sing If You Want To (1997).Constantin Brancusi,  (born February 19, 1876, Hobița, Romania-died March 16, 1957, Paris, France), pioneer of modern abstract sculpture whose works in bronze and marble are characterized by a restrained, elegant use of pure form and exquisite finishing. A passionate wood-carver, he produced numerous wood sculptures, often with a folk flavour, and he frequently carved prototypes for works later executed in other materials. He is best known for his abstract sculptures of ovoid heads and birds in flight.

Brancusi’s parents, Nicolas and Maria Brancusi, were peasants who lived in the Romanian countryside; like other village children of that time, Constantin did not go to school. From the age of seven he worked as a herdsman, first watching the family flock, then working for other people in the Carpathian Mountains. It was then that the young shepherd learned to carve wood, a popular art in rural Romania for making spoons, bedposts, cheese presses, and facades of homes, all of which were ornamented with carvings. The style of these ornaments would influence several of Brancusi’s works. In his tastes, his bearing, and his way of life he would forever maintain the uncomplicated tastes of his origins.

When he was nine years old Brancusi went to Tîrgu Jiu, a town near Pestisani, in the Oltenia region of Romania, to look for work. First he worked for a dyer; two years later he went into the service of a grocer in Slatina; and then he became a domestic in a public house in Craiova, Oltenia’s chief town, where he remained for several years. He retained his taste for working in wood and undertook elaborate carving projects, such as the construction of a violin from an orange crate. Such feats attracted the attention of an industrialist, who in 1894 entered him in the Craiova School of Arts and Crafts. In order to attend the school, Brancusi had to learn how to read and write on his own.

In 1896, at age 20, Brancusi began to travel for the first time: he went to Vienna on the Danube and hired himself out as a woodworker to earn money for his stay. Since his ambition was to be a sculptor, in 1898 he entered the contest for admission to the Bucharest School of Fine Arts and was admitted. Although he was far more attracted to the work of the "independents" than to that of the academicians at his school, he nevertheless studied modeling and anatomy seriously.

In 1903, on his return from military service, Brancusi’s interest was aroused by the fame of Auguste Rodin, which had spread from Paris to Bucharest. Rodin’s audacious conceptions inspired the enthusiasm of the avant-garde and the indignation of the academicians. The example of Rodin inspired Brancusi to become curious about what was going on in the art world beyond the boundaries of his country, and so he went to Munich, Germany, where he stayed until the spring of 1904. He then decided to go to Paris, a costly trip for a man of modest means. He made the greater part of the trip on foot, with his pack on his back, and had to sell his watch to pay for a boat crossing on Lake Constance. He arrived in Paris in July.

Brancusi entered the École des Beaux-Arts, where he again entered an academician’s workshop, that of Antonin Mercié, who derived his work from Florentine Renaissance statuary. Brancusi worked with him for two years, but in order to earn a living he worked odd jobs. Orders for portraits from a few compatriots also helped him through difficult times. In 1906 he exhibited for the first time in Paris, in the state-sponsored Salon and then at the Salon d’Automne. With a spirit that was still quite Classical but showing great energy, his first works were influenced by the sinewy work of Rodin. In order to get away from that influence, Brancusi refused to enter Rodin’s workshop, for, he said, "one can do nothing beneath great trees."

In 1907, commissioned to execute a rich landowner’s funeral monument in the Buzau Cemetery in Romania, Brancusi sculpted a statue of a young girl kneeling, entitled The Prayer, which represented the first stage of his evolution toward simplified forms. He participated for the first time in the Tinerimea Artistica exposition, an annual exhibition of new talent, in Bucharest, and rented a workshop in the Montparnasse area of Paris. Rodin’s influence appeared in Brancusi’s work for one last time in 1908 in the first version of the Sleeping Muse, a sculpture of a woman’s face in which the features suggest an unformed block of marble. Also in 1908 Brancusi executed his first truly original work, The Kiss, in which the vertical figures of two entwined adolescents form a closed volume with symmetrical lines. In one of his first experiments with direct carving, he affirmed the pure, organic use of form that was to become his trademark and that would influence the work of numerous artists, most immediately a series of sculptures executed by his friend Amedeo Modigliani starting in 1910.…Greek architect and city planner Constantinos Apostolos Doxiadis argued that this process is part of a long-term evolution that must eventually culminate in the world-city, or "Ecumenopolis." This remarkable object will incorporate areas reserved for recreation and agriculture as well as desert and wilderness conservation areas, but essentially it will…Cornelis Drebbel (born 1572, Alkmaar, Netherlands-died November 7, 1633, London, England) Dutch inventor who built the first navigable submarine.

An engraver and glassworker in Holland, Drebbel turned to applied science and in 1604 went to England, where King James I became his patron. He devised an ingenious "perpetual motion clock," actuated by changes in atmospheric pressure and temperature, which greatly enhanced his reputation. In 1620 he completed his "diving boat." Propelled by oars and sealed against the water by a covering of greased leather, the wooden vessel travelled the River Thames at a depth of 12 to 15 feet (about 4 metres) from Westminster to Greenwich. Air was supplied by two tubes with floats to maintain one end above water.

Drebbel also discovered the use of tin compounds as mordants for cochineal, a scarlet dye, and suggested a method of making sulfuric acid by the oxidation of sulfur. Among many other inventions attributed to him are the compound microscope, an improved thermometer, and self-regulating ovens.…others give the distinction to Cyril Demian of Vienna, who patented his Accordion in 1829, thus coining the name. A modification of the Handäoline, Demian’s invention comprised a small manual bellows and five keys, although, as Demian noted in a description of the instrument, extra keys could be incorporated into……with Oh Mercy, produced by Daniel Lanois. When Life magazine published a list of the 100 most influential Americans of the 20th century in 1990, Dylan was included, and in 1991 he received a lifetime achievement award from the Recording Academy. In 1992 Columbia Records celebrated the 30th anniversary of……novelists, including Edmund White and David Leavitt, who have made art out of previously repressed and unnarrated areas of homoerotic experience. Literature is above all the narrative medium of the arts, the one that still best relates What Happened to Me, and American literature, at least, has only been enriched… Jina Mahsa Amini, an Iranian woman in her early 20s, died unexpectedly on September 16, 2022, while in custody of Iran’s Gasht-e Ershad (Guidance Patrol; also called "morality police") for "improper" clothing. The incident sparked outrage in Iran, where anger toward the government had already been flaring, and ignited a sustained and widespread protest movement. The protests over Amini’s death, which reflected a broad and far-reaching set of grievances caused by persistent government negligence, found expression in the slogan "Woman, Life, Freedom."

Amini was born on September 21, 1999, and lived in Kurdistan province in northwest Iran. She was from a Kurdish family, who named her Jina after the Kurdish word for "life." Because Iran’s Islamic Republic restricts names that are neither Persian nor Islamic, the family registered her with the Persian name Mahsa.

She was quiet but ambitious, and she was set to begin studying at a university in late 2022. Just months before her death, she began running a boutique shop that her father had opened on her behalf.

In 2022 Iran was struggling to pacify a deeply disaffected populace. Iranians were restless after years of economic hardship, and a sharp increase in austerity measures led to sizable protests and strikes in June and July. Meanwhile, the government of Pres. Ebrahim Raisi was ramping up spending on security, surveillance, and censorship in an effort to stabilize the country. Strict enforcement of state-sanctioned dress and behaviour, as determined by the ruling class of predominantly Persian Shiʿi clerics, was among those measures.

In the early evening of September 13 Amini and her brother arrived in Tehrān to visit relatives. As they left the train station, the Gasht-e Ershad seized Amini for "improper" clothing and told them that she would be taken to a detention centre for a corrective class on mandatory public attire. The Aminis protested-they had only just arrived in the city and were unaware of the new enforcement guidelines-and the officers responded with force. Other women detained by the Gasht-e Ershad that day reported that Jina Mahsa Amini was severely beaten in the patrol van for resisting the arrest.

At the detention centre later that evening, Amini collapsed. Segmented CCTV footage released by the government showed her falling suddenly while speaking with a female officer. She slipped into a coma and was taken to a hospital, where she died three days later, on September 16.

The cause of Amini’s collapse, as well as her death, remains unclear. The family was initially told that she had suffered a heart attack and a stroke. Government coroners cited "multiple organ failure caused by cerebral hypoxia" and claimed the incident was related to a brain surgery they had found in her health records. But her family denied that there had been any complications from that surgery, which had taken place more than a decade earlier, and dismissed the assertions that she suffered from preexisting health concerns. They were not allowed to examine her body, but photographs and video taken of Amini during her hospital visit indicated trauma to her head.

The reaction, at first, was local. Amini’s death struck a chord in a decades-long movement among Kurds against the killing of Kurdish women. At her funeral, in Iran’s Kurdistan province, attendees chanted the slogan that had been so frequently intoned at the funerals of Kurdish women: "Jin, Jiyan, Azadî" (Woman, Life, Freedom). Some women removed their headscarves as the funeral evolved into a protest. Security forces clashed with the crowd and news of the confrontation spread rapidly. Protests soon broke out in other cities across Iran, with many protesters repeating the chant heard at Amini’s funeral and removing their own head coverings.

Although Iran had been beset by several massive and notable protests in recent years, the protests ignited by Amini’s death proved to be the greatest eruption of unrest within Iran since the 1979 revolution. They not only brought together women seeking better treatment under the law but also men, like Amini’s brother, who were concerned about what an increasingly brutal state would mean for them and their loved ones. Baloch, Azeris, and Arabs likewise joined Kurds in the outrage at the regime’s treatment of ethnic and religious minorities. Some religious Iranians also voiced support for the movement, including members of the Sunni minority as well as Shiʿis who advocated greater religious freedom. By the end of the year, about 20,000 protesters had been arrested and at least 500 others had been killed, numbers that were much higher than those in the more organized but less enduring demonstrations of the Green Movement in 2009.

For months the protests offered hope for meaningful change. Women appeared frequently in public without wearing the mandatory headscarves, the Gasht-e Ershad had seemingly vanished, and rumours swirled that the government might scrap the head covering requirement altogether. But, as the unrest was subsiding in the beginning of 2023, it appeared that the government intended only to double down. In January the judiciary announced harsher sentencing for violators of the dress code. In March the government began using surveillance cameras to enforce it. In July the Gasht-e Ershad returned to the streets.Behind sharpshooter Devin Booker, the Suns nearly made the playoffs following the 2019–20 NBA season. That improvement paled in comparison with that of the following season when a young Phoenix team-having traded for superstar point guard Chris Paul in November 2020-jelled under the guidance of head coach…Dga’-ldan,  (born 1644?, Central Asia-died  May 3, 1697, near Altay, East Turkistan [now Xinjiang, China]), leader of the Dzungar tribes of Mongols (reigned 1676–97). He conquered an empire that included Tibet in the southwest and ranged across Central Asia to the borders of Russia on the northeast.

Dga’-ldan was a descendant of Esen, a Mongol chieftain who harassed the northern border of China during the 15th century, and his father was a powerful Dzungar chief. As a younger son, Dga’-ldan was sent to Tibet, a Dzungar protectorate since 1636, where he was educated to be a Buddhist lama. In 1671, however, when his brother (who had become the tribal leader) was murdered, Dga’-ldan returned to Turkistan to seek vengeance. Because of his great military ability and his prestige as a lama, he rapidly gained authority over the other Dzungar chiefs. He avenged his brother’s death and then occupied all of East Turkistan (now in Uighur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang), subduing the Muslim population there. He then conquered Outer Mongolia (now Mongolia), expelling the Khalkha Mongols from their land.

In 1690 Dga’-ldan led his armies toward Beijing, the Chinese capital, but the Chinese forces stopped him short of his destination. Finally in 1696, after several years of indecisive fighting, the second emperor Kangxi of Qing-dynasty China, allied with the Khalkhans, personally led some 80,000 troops across Mongolia in pursuit of Dga’-ldan. Kangxi’s use of Western artillery, made under instruction from Jesuit missionaries, crushed Dga’-ldan at Dzuunmod, near present-day Ulaanbaatar. The battle signaled the beginning of Chinese domination over the Central Asian nomads who had harassed the empire for a millennium.

Although his wife and son were killed, Dga’-ldan refused to surrender. He fled with a small band of followers to the Altai Mountains. When news came the next year that the emperor was leading another expedition against him, Dga’-ldan reportedly poisoned himself.Dick Tiger (born August 14, 1929, Amaigbo, Orlu, Nigeria-died December 14, 1971, Nigeria) Nigerian professional boxer, world middleweight (160 pounds) and light heavyweight (175 pounds) champion during the 1960s.

(Read Gene Tunney’s 1929 Britannica essay on boxing.)

Tiger learned to box from British military officers stationed in Nigeria. He began his professional boxing career in his homeland in 1952, and he went on to win the Nigerian championship in the middleweight division before moving to England in 1955. After losing his first four matches in England, he improved rapidly, and on March 27, 1958, he knocked out Pat McAteer to become the British Commonwealth middleweight champion.

In 1959 Tiger began boxing in the United States, and on October 23, 1962, he won the World Boxing Association (WBA) middleweight title with a 15-round decision (a fight whose outcome is determined by judges’ scoring) over American Gene Fullmer. Tiger retained the title with a 15-round draw with Fullmer on February 23, 1963, and with a 7th-round knockout of Fullmer on August 10, 1963. Tiger lost the title on December 7, 1963, in a 15-round decision to American Joey Giardello (Carmen Orlando Telleli). On October 21, 1965, Tiger regained the championship by defeating Giardello in a 15-round decision. He lost the title again on April 25, 1966, when Emile Griffith of the U.S. Virgin Islands, the world welterweight (147 pounds) champion, moved up in weight class and won a 15-round decision.

Tiger himself moved up in weight class for his next bout, on December 16, 1966, in which he won a 15-round decision for the world light heavyweight title over Puerto Rican José Torres. The following year, Tiger was successful in two light heavyweight championship matches, outpointing Torres in 15 rounds on May 16 and knocking out American Roger Rouse in 12 rounds on November 17. Tiger lost the light heavyweight title when he was knocked out by American Bob Foster in the fourth round on May 24, 1968. That was the only time in his career that Tiger lost by knockout, and it also was his last championship bout. In his last fight, on July 15, 1970, he lost a 10-round decision to Griffith. He finally announced his retirement in July 1971, after fighting in 81 professional matches, winning 61 (26 by knockouts), losing 17, and drawing 3. Tiger was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1991.

During the civil war in Biafra (May 1967–January 1970), Tiger served in the Biafran army as a public relations officer. He lost his property and money in the war and returned to New York, where he was employed as a security guard at a museum. When he became terminally ill with cancer, he returned to Nigeria to live out the remainder of his life.Domenico Alberti (born c. 1710, Venice [Italy]-died  1740, Formia or Rome) Venetian composer whose harpsichord sonatas depend heavily on an accompaniment pattern of broken, or arpeggiated, chords known as the Alberti bass.

Alberti studied under the composer Antonio Lotti and was known in Rome as a singer and harpsichordist. Although he probably did not originate the Alberti bass, he consistently used it. This accompaniment pattern sets the melody against a gently moving harmonic background, satisfying the contemporary aesthetic taste for melodic predominance. It was frequently used by Joseph Haydn, Ludwig van Beethoven, and W.A. Mozart (an example is the first movement of Mozart’s Piano Sonata in C Major, K 279) and also appears in 19th-century compositions. Alberti’s sonatas were plagiarized by the singer and harpsichordist Giuseppe Jozzi, who had been Alberti’s pupil.Dorothy Whipple,  (born February 26, 1893, Blackburn, Lancashire, England-died September 14, 1966, Blackburn), English novelist and short-story writer whose works, set largely in the north of England, excavate the everyday experiences of middle-class households of her era.

She grew up in Blackburn as one of eight children of Walter Stirrup, a local architect, and his wife, Ada. In 1917 she married an educational administrator, Henry Whipple, who was more than two decades older; they later settled in Nottingham. After the first decade of her marriage, Whipple embarked on a serious literary career that saw the publication of nine novels, the first of which was Young Anne (1927) and which also included High Wages (1930), Greenbanks (1932), and The Priory (1939). Two of her novels (They Knew Mr. Knight [1934] and They Were Sisters [1943]) were adapted for film in the 1940s. She also published three collections of short stories-selections from which appear in The Closed Door, and Other Stories (2007)-as well as two autobiographical works and several children’s books. Someone at a Distance (1953) was her last novel, and her popularity declined thereafter. Although sometimes reprinted in following decades, her work received renewed attention at the turn of the 21st century.Ed Koch (born December 12, 1924, Bronx, New York, U.S.-died February 1, 2013, New York City) American politician who served as mayor of New York City (1978–89) and was known for his tenacity and brashness.

After serving in the army during World War II, Koch graduated from New York University Law School (1948). He subsequently practiced law, becoming a founding partner of Koch, Lankenau, Schwartz & Kovner in 1963. Koch, a member of the Democratic Party, was instrumental in dismantling the influence of Tammany Hall power broker Carmine De Sapio, whom he defeated twice (1963 and 1965) as Greenwich Village district leader. Koch was a member (1966–68) of the City Council, supporting liberal causes, before his 1968 election to the U.S. House of Representatives, where he served from 1969 to 1977.

In 1977 Koch was elected to the first of three terms as mayor of New York City. When he took office the following year, the city was reeling from high crime, a devastating 1977 blackout, and a fiscal crisis. During his first term, which many considered his best, he instituted austerity measures and moderated the municipal unions, measures that helped bolster the city’s finances during his second term. Koch, who was known for his trademark catchphrase "How’m I doin’?," won a third term with 78 percent of the vote, but that period was marked by corruption allegations aimed at his political associates, as well as criticisms of his handling of the AIDS crisis. However, he was credited with instituting an ambitious housing program that led to the refurbishment of thousands of abandoned housing units. Long known for his brash outspokenness, Koch confessed that "I’m the sort of person who will never get ulcers. Why? Because I say exactly what I think. I’m the sort of person who might give other people ulcers." Nonetheless, some of his remarks were considered racially insensitive and raised hackles among African Americans, as did his closure of a hospital that had long served the Black community. The divisive nature of his last term resulted in his losing his fourth bid for election to David Dinkins, who became New York City’s first Black mayor.

Koch, the ultimate showman and raconteur, stayed in the media spotlight as a columnist, talk-show host, and writer. He published two memoirs, Mayor (1984) and Citizen Koch (1992). The documentary film Koch (2013) opened in theatres the day that he died.Ed Paschke (born June 22, 1939, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.-died November 25, 2004, Chicago) American artist affiliated with the Chicago Imagists and known for his confrontational, colourful paintings, many of which depict society’s marginal figures and make reference to pop culture, often in a highly sexualized or grotesque manner.

Paschke found his earliest inspiration in comic strips in the local paper, especially those drawn by Burne Hogarth, creator of the Tarzan comic. As a child, Paschke wrote his own comic book about football players (he was also an accomplished athlete). In 1957 he began studying art at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC), where he impressed his teachers and peers with his skilled draftsmanship but could not get a feel for abstract or Expressionist painting, which were the prevailing styles within the art world in the 1950s and thus central to art school curricula. He graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in 1961. 

Paschke got his first art-related job in 1961 as an illustrator of articles for Playboy magazine, for which he continued to do freelance work until 1989. At that time he also briefly worked in a mental institution, where he had his first encounters with society’s castoffs and marginalized types. That experience formed the basis of the most-prevalent theme in his painting. Paschke was drafted in 1962 to Fort Polk, Louisiana, where he was tasked with illustrating weapons-training manuals for incoming troops. When he was released from service in 1964, he went back to Chicago, where he subsisted on the income from a string of odd jobs. He was actively engaged in the art scene, attending art exhibitions and traveling to see art in New York City. In part as a result of those trips, he started to paint representational compositions in that period, a tradition that was experiencing a renaissance with the Pop art movement of the early 1960s, examples of which he had seen firsthand in New York. 

In 1968 Paschke enrolled again at SAIC on the G.I. Bill, and he earned an M.F.A. in 1970. His return to school connected him with a group of like-minded SAIC graduates who would come to be known as the Chicago Imagists. The Imagists’ work was figurative and was characterized by grotesque or risqué imagery and overt references to pop culture, sexuality, and violence. In bold, sometimes neon, colour and in a style that synthesized the effect of Andy Warhol’s photo-based paintings with Photo-realism and Surrealism, Paschke depicted imagined figures, movie stars (Marilyn Monroe in his painting Pink Lady, 1970), wrestlers (Mid American and Ramrod, both 1969), characters from circus sideshow acts (Minnie, 1974), and a range of types from all walks of life.

During the late 1960s and early ’70s, Paschke exhibited in Chicago with the Imagists at the Hyde Park Art Center ("Marriage Chicago Style," 1970, and "Chicago Antigua," 1971) and at the Museum of Contemporary Art ("Don Baum Says ‘Chicago Needs Famous Artists’," 1969, and "Chicago Imagist Art," 1972). In 1970 he had his first one-person show at the Deson-Zaks Gallery in Chicago, and in 1977 (through 1996) he found representation with the Phyllis Kind Gallery and exhibited his work (along with the work of many of the Imagists) at her Chicago and New York City locations.  He became Northwestern University’s first full-time professor of art in 1978. By the mid-1970s he had begun to act as a mentor to up-and-coming artists, among them Jeff Koons, who served as Paschke’s studio assistant in that period. Paschke taught both in and out of the classroom for the rest of his life.

In the 1980s and ’90s Paschke continued to paint large heads with exaggerated features and close-up portraits of imagined or recognizable people, such as Elvis Presley and Abraham Lincoln. His work also began to show the influence of video technology, with neon-coloured horizontal lines appearing across his canvases, mimicking those produced on a television screen. Colour and pattern generated by film, video, and television were integral to his compositions throughout those decades. 

Paschke’s work was recognized by a major retrospective in 1989–90 organized by the Art Institute of Chicago, which then traveled to the Pompidou Centre in Paris and the Dallas Museum of Art. His devotion to the city of Chicago earned Paschke the nickname "Mr. Chicago," and in 2005, a year after his sudden death, the city designated Monroe Street (between Michigan Avenue and Columbus Drive alongside the Art Institute) Ed Paschke Way. In June 2014 the Ed Paschke Art Center opened in the Jefferson Park neighbourhood of Chicago to preserve and exhibit Paschke’s work, exhibit the work of other contemporary artists, and serve as an educational resource for artists, academics, and teachers. Edward Stanley, 3rd earl of Derby,  (born 1508/09-died  Oct. 24, 1572, Lathom House, near Ormskirk, Lancashire, Eng.), second son of the 2nd earl, succeeding to the earldom on his father’s death in May 1521. During his minority Cardinal Wolsey was his guardian, and as soon as he came of age he began to take part in public life. He helped to quell the rising known as the Pilgrimage of Grace in 1536, but, remaining true to the Roman Catholic faith, he disliked and opposed the religious changes made under Edward VI. Under Elizabeth his younger sons, Sir Thomas (d. 1576) and Sir Edward Stanley (d. 1609), were concerned in a plot to free Mary, Queen of Scots, and he himself was suspected of disloyalty.Emilio Castelar y Ripoll (born September 7, 1832, Cádiz, Spain-died May 25, 1899, San Pedro del Pinatar) statesman and author, one of the most powerful champions of Spanish republicanism in the latter half of the 19th century. He was president of the first Spanish Republic from September 1873 to January 1874.

Castelar studied at the University of Madrid, where he became professor of history and was active in politics. He achieved fame as an orator and notoriety for his speeches against the monarchy; this latter activity lost him his chair in April 1865. After the abortive republican uprising of 1866, he was sentenced to death but escaped to France. After the successful revolution of 1868, he returned and entered the Cortes (parliament) as an energetic and effective defender of republican ideals. As a minister of state, he was responsible for the abolition of slavery in Puerto Rico.

When Castelar assumed leadership of the republic in 1873, Spain was at the height of disturbance and turmoil. He strengthened the army and resolutely undertook to crush rebellion. He also embarked on a policy of conciliation with the Roman Catholic church. His tactful and statesmanlike stance prevented rupture with the United States over the Virginius affair (October 31, 1873), in which U.S. seamen were executed as pirates by Spain during a Cuban insurrection.

Castelar was ousted from office by republican opposition to his conservative and conciliatory policies. A military coup followed, and he went into exile. After the accession of King Alfonso XII (1874–85), he returned and was elected to the Cortes. He became reconciled to the monarchy but continued to champion a unitary and conservative republic that would be established and run by legal and peaceful means.

Castelar authored many literary and journalistic writings, leaving behind more than 90 works, including novels, histories, and political speeches. He was considered one of the greatest orators of his time.Enrico Caruso (born February 25, 1873, Naples, Italy-died August 2, 1921, Naples) the most admired Italian operatic tenor of the early 20th century and one of the first musicians to document his voice on recordings.

Caruso was born into a poor family. Although he was a musical child who sang Neapolitan folk songs everywhere and joined his parish choir at the age of nine, he received no formal music training until his study with Guglielmo Vergine at age 18. Within three years, in 1894, he made his operatic debut, in Mario Morelli’s L’amico Francesco in Naples at the Teatro Nuovo. Four years later, after adding a number of impressive roles to his repertoire, he was asked to create the role of Loris in the premiere of Umberto Giordano’s Fedora in Milan. He was a sensation and soon had engagements in Moscow, St. Petersburg, and Buenos Aires. He made his La Scala debut with La Bohème (1900). In 1901, after being unfavourably received in his performance in L’elisir d’amore in Naples, he vowed never again to sing in Naples, and he kept his word.

Caruso then created the chief tenor parts in Adriana Lecouvreur, Germania, and La fanciulla del West, and for the La Scala company the tenor roles in Le maschere and L’elisir d’amore. World recognition came in the spring of 1902 after he sang in La Bohème at Monte Carlo and in Rigoletto at London’s Covent Garden. He made his American debut in Rigoletto at the opening night of the Metropolitan Opera in New York City on November 23, 1903, and continued to open each season there for the next 17 years, presenting 36 roles in all. His last public appearance-his 607th performance with the Metropolitan Opera-was as Eléazar in La Juive (December 24, 1920).

Caruso became the most celebrated and highest paid of his contemporaries worldwide. He made recordings of about 200 operatic excerpts and songs; many of them are still being published. His voice was sensuous, lyrical, and vigorous in dramatic outbursts and became progressively darker in timbre in his later years. Its appealing tenor qualities were unusually rich in lower registers and abounded in warmth, vitality, and smoothness.…the PdL moved to support Enrico Letta, a moderate member of the Democratic Party (Partito Democratico; PD), and a cross-party coalition government was formed. Another trial reached its conclusion in June 2013, when Berlusconi was found guilty of soliciting sex from an underage prostitute and sentenced to seven years in……1765 and renamed for Colonel Ephraim Williams, killed in the French and Indian War (1754–63), who had bequeathed money in his will to establish a "free school" there provided the town bear his name. The school was opened in 1791 and chartered as Williams College in 1793. The town’s Sterling…Erich von Stroheim (born September 22, 1885, Vienna, Austria-died May 12, 1957, near Paris, France) one of the most critically respected motion-picture directors of the 20th century, best known for the uncompromising realism and accuracy of detail in his films. He also wrote screenplays and won recognition as an actor, notably for roles as sadistic, monocled Prussian officers.

Various sources provide contradictory information about Stroheim’s early life, probably because Stroheim himself was fond of embellishing his past. He was not, as reported in several accounts, descended from Viennese nobility, nor had he been an officer in the Austrian army. Rather, he was the son of a Jewish hatmaker, and he served in the army-though he was never an officer-before coming to the United States in 1909. He worked as an actor and as assistant to the leading director D.W. Griffith in such famous early films as The Birth of a Nation (1915) and Intolerance (1916). Stroheim wrote the script and played the leading role in Blind Husbands (1919), his first independently directed picture. As an early exemplar of the changing postwar morality, it intimated that a woman had the right to seek love outside of an unsatisfying marriage. Stroheim’s growing obsession with painstaking detail was reflected in The Devil’s Passkey (1920; now lost) and Foolish Wives (1922), pictures that enhanced his reputation as a director.

Stroheim’s masterpiece was Greed (1924), an adaptation of Frank Norris’s novel McTeague (1899), which dealt with the power of money to corrupt. A landmark in film realism, its grim irony and brutal honesty were untempered by optimism or compassion. Stroheim engaged in many legendary battles with studio executives over the years, but none so bitter as when Greed was cut from its original 9-hour length to 140 minutes without Stroheim’s approval or participation. Despite the cuts, the film retained much of its power, because Stroheim had concentrated the meaning of each scene in carefully constructed detail rather than by the juxtaposition of scenes. It remains a film classic and strongly influenced such later directors as King Vidor and Josef von Sternberg.

Although The Merry Widow (1925), The Wedding March (1928), and Queen Kelly (1928) were commercially successful, Stroheim’s reputation for extravagance, his fanatical insistence on complete artistic freedom regardless of any economic considerations, and his sophisticated treatment of controversial subjects ended his Hollywood directing career. He returned to Europe as an actor and thereafter appeared only occasionally in American pictures, such as Five Graves to Cairo (1943). One of his notable characterizations was the prison-camp commandant in Jean Renoir’s La Grande Illusion (1937), and he was nominated for an Academy Award for his supporting performance in Billy Wilder’s Sunset Boulevard (1950).Ernest Jones (born Jan. 1, 1879, Rhosfelyn, Glamorgan, Wales-died  Feb. 11, 1958, London, Eng.) psychoanalyst and a key figure in the advancement of his profession in Britain. One of Sigmund Freud’s closest associates and staunchest supporters, he wrote an exhaustive three-volume biography of Freud.

After receiving his medical degree (1903), Jones became a member of the Royal College of Physicians, London (1904), and held several successive hospital and clinical posts in that city. His interest shifted gradually from clinical medicine to neurology, psychiatry, and, ultimately, psychoanalysis. With Carl Jung he organized the first psychoanalytic congress at Salzburg, Austria (1908), where he first met Freud. That year he went to Canada, where he began a four-year period at the Toronto General Hospital and ventured into teaching psychoanalysis and experimenting with psychoanalytic techniques. Jones’s principal contributions to psychoanalytic theory developed from his application of psychoanalytic principles to anthropology, folklore, art, and literature. His famous essay (1910) explaining the character of Hamlet in terms of the Oedipus complex later was revised and published in book form as Hamlet and Oedipus (1949).

Jones was active in establishing the American Psychoanalytic Association (1911). He wrote monographs on the study of suggestion, symbolism, character formation, and obsessional neuroses; those works were collected in Papers on Psycho-Analysis (1913). After his return to London in 1913 he practiced psychoanalysis. He founded an institute and clinic as well as the International Journal of Psychoanalysis, which he edited until 1939. Largely through his efforts, the British Medical Association recognized psychoanalysis in 1929. During the 1930s, Jones helped many displaced German analysts to resettle in England and other countries. After the Nazi takeover of Austria in 1938, Jones played a critical role in enabling the ailing Freud and his family to go to London. From 1944 on he spent much of his time preparing his authoritative biography, The Life and Works of Sigmund Freud (1953–57).Ernie Banks,  (born January 31, 1931, Dallas, Texas, U.S.-died January 23, 2015, Chicago, Illinois), American professional baseball player, regarded as one of the finest power hitters in the history of the game. Banks starred for the Chicago Cubs from 1953 to 1971. An 11-time All-Star, Banks was named the National League’s (NL) Most Valuable Player for two consecutive seasons (1958–59). He hit more than 40 home runs in five different seasons, leading the NL in that category in 1958 and 1960. He also led the league in 1958–59 in runs batted in.

Banks excelled in football, basketball, track and field, and baseball at his Dallas high school. At age 17 he joined a barnstorming Negro league team at a salary rate of $15 per game. In 1950 legendary Negro league star Cool Papa Bell signed him to the Kansas City Monarchs. Soon after, Banks spent two years in the U.S. Army, after which he returned to the Monarchs. His stay there was short-lived, however, as the major leagues, recently integrated, were eager to take advantage of the wealth of talent in the Negro leagues.

Signed by the Chicago Cubs in 1953, Banks soon established himself as one of the league’s leading power hitters. In addition to his potent bat, he proved to be a skilled defensive player, setting a single-season mark for fielding percentage for a shortstop in 1959. After injuries limited his mobility, Banks moved to first base in 1962.

Banks was known for his enthusiasm and love of the game, his trademark cry of "let’s play two!" reflecting the pure enjoyment he took in baseball. When he retired in 1971, he was the holder of most of the Chicago Cubs’ offensive records and had earned the nickname "Mr. Cub" among the team’s fans. In his career Banks totaled 512 home runs and 1,636 runs batted in. He was elected into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1977; he was the eighth player to be elected in his first year of eligibility. In 2013 Banks was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.Esther,  heroine and central figure in the Book of Esther of the Hebrew Bible and Christian Old Testament. She was a beautiful Jewish woman, the wife of the Persian king Ahasuerus (Xerxes I). She and her cousin Mordecai persuaded the king to cancel an order for the extermination of Jews in his realm, plotted by the king’s chief minister, Haman. Instead, Haman was hanged, and the Jews were given permission to destroy their enemies. The Jewish festival of Purim celebrates this event. The Book of Esther was probably written in the 2nd century bce.

Laying the scene at Susa, a residential city of the Persian kings, the Book of Esther narrates that King Ahasuerus deposed his first wife, Queen Vashti, after she refused to display her beauty to the people and nobles at the king’s feast. Seeking a new queen, the king appointed commissioners to bring all the beautiful young virgins from every province into his harem for a year of cosmetic treatments so that he might select a new bride. Esther, the orphaned cousin and adopted daughter of Mordecai, won the king’s devotion and was chosen to be the new queen; Mordecai had instructed her to not reveal that she was Jewish. Esther gained even greater favour with Ahasuerus after she helped thwart an assassination plot against him that Mordecai overheard at the palace gate.

Esther’s story culminates when the beloved queen is faced with the decision to either continue to disguise her Jewish heritage and maintain her safety or jeopardize everything to advocate for her people. Haman, having become incensed that Mordecai, a Jew, held him in disdain and refused obeisance, convinced the king that the Jews living under Persian rule were rebellious and should be slaughtered. With the king’s consent, Haman set a date for the execution (the 13th day of the month of Adar) by casting lots and built a gallows specifically for Mordecai. When word of the planned massacre reached Esther, she risked her life by going uninvited to the king to suggest a banquet that Haman would attend. At the meal she pleaded for the Jews, thus revealing herself as Jewish, and accused "this wicked Haman" of plotting the annihilation of her people. Upset, the king stepped out into the palace gardens. On returning, he found Haman "falling on the couch where Esther was." The king mistook Haman’s frantic pleas for mercy as an attack upon the queen. The outraged king ordered that Haman be hanged on the gallows built for Mordecai and that Mordecai be named to fill Haman’s position. Esther and Mordecai then obtained a royal edict allowing Jews throughout the empire to defend themselves on the day set for their extermination. After an exhilarating victory, they declared the following day a holiday and (alluding to the lots Haman had cast) named it Purim, which is Hebrew for "lots."

The historical reality of this biblical episode, and whether or not Esther actually existed, has often been questioned. The actual origins of the Purim festival, which was already long established by the 2nd century bce, remain unknown. The ritual observance of Purim begins with a day of fasting, Taʿanit Esther (Fast of Esther) on Adar 13, the day preceding the actual holiday, in honour of the fast Mordecai and the other Jews held on Esther’s behalf when she went uninvited to the king.Étienne Jodelle (born 1532, Paris, France-died  July 1573, Paris) French dramatist and poet, one of the seven members of the literary circle known as La Pléiade, who applied the aesthetic principles of the group to drama.

Jodelle aimed at creating a classical drama that in every respect would be different from the moralities and mysteries then occupying the French stage; he succeeded in producing the first modern French tragedy and comedy. These plays have the reputation of being unactable and unreadable, but they set a new example that prepared the ground for the great Neoclassical tragedians Corneille and Racine. His first play, Cléopâtre captive, a tragedy in verse, was presented before the court at Paris in 1553. The cast included his friends Rémy Belleau and Jean de La Péruse. Jodelle wrote two other plays, Eugène (1552), a comedy, and Didon se sacrifiant, another verse tragedy, based on Virgil’s account of Dido.

In the prologue to Eugéne Jodelle explained his theory of comedy. It must deal with people of low or middle class because, he argued, among them can be found the crudity and ignorance that are the stuff of comedy. Tragedy, on the other hand, must have as its characters kings or other nobility, like the audiences for which it is written, because the populace would not understand the classical allusions of tragedy.Eusébio (born January 25, 1942, Lourenço Marques, Portuguese East Africa [now Maputo, Mozambique]-died January 5, 2014, Lisbon, Portugal) the greatest Portuguese football (soccer) player of all time. He was celebrated for his long runs through defenders and his deft scoring touch.

Eusébio began his career playing on the Sporting Clube de Lourenço Marques in what was then the Portuguese territory of Mozambique. The Lisbon team Benfica acquired Eusébio on his arrival in Portugal in 1960; the following year he played in his first game with the club. In the 1962 European Cup final against Real Madrid, he scored two goals in Benfica’s 5–3 victory. He was named European Footballer of the Year in 1965, and during the 1966 World Cup in England he led Portugal to a third-place finish and was the top scorer, with nine goals. Eusébio also won the first annual Golden Shoe as Europe’s leading scorer in 1968 (42 goals) and won the award again in 1973 (40 goals). Eusébio was the Portuguese League’s leading scorer seven times (1964–68, 1970, and 1973) and led Benfica to 11 league championships before he badly injured his knee in 1974. Following knee surgery, Eusébio played for various teams in North America and Portugal before retiring in 1979.

Eusébio scored 41 goals in 64 international matches and 727 goals in 715 games for Benfica, which in 1992 erected a statue in his honour and in 2008 established the annual Eusébio Cup tournament. After Eusébio’s death was announced, the Portuguese government declared a three-day mourning period.Eva Figes,  (born April 15, 1932, Berlin, Germany-died August 28, 2012, London, England), English novelist, social critic, and translator who reacted against traditional realist literature by inventing new forms for her own works.

Figes received a B.A. with honours from Queen Mary College in London in 1953 and subsequently worked for various publishing companies until 1967, when she became a full-time writer. Her poetic novels explore the inner lives of the characters, often through a stream-of-consciousness technique. Equinox (1966) examines the breakup of a marriage and the protagonist’s subsequent struggle to rebuild her world. It was published about the time of the author’s own divorce from George Figes. Winter Journey (1967) relates a day in the life of an isolated old man. Each of the seven chapters of Waking (1981) begins with a woman awaking at a different stage in her life, from idyllic childhood to approaching death. Her later novels include Light (1983), The Seven Ages (1986), Ghosts (1988), The Tree of Knowledge (1990), The Tenancy (1993), and The Knot (1996).

In addition to fiction, Figes wrote several books of criticism, including Patriarchal Attitudes: Women in Society (1970) and Sex and Subterfuge: Women Novelists to 1850 (1982); an autobiography, Little Eden (1978), which examines her father’s imprisonment at the Dachau concentration camp and the family’s subsequent escape to England; and the memoirs Tales of Innocence and Experience (2003) and Journey to Nowhere (2008).Flora Adams Darling (born July 25, 1840, Lancaster, N.H., U.S.-died Jan. 6, 1910, New York, N.Y.)  American writer, historian, and organizer, an influential though controversial figure in the founding and early years of the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) and other patriotic societies.

Educated at Lancaster Academy, Flora Adams in 1860 married Edward I. Darling, who died during the Civil War (no records confirm her later claim that he was a Confederate army officer), and after some difficulty she made her way back north. She soon instituted a claim against the federal government for recompense for valuables allegedly stolen from her luggage by Union soldiers. Prosecuting the claim became one of her chief occupations, and it was not ultimately settled until 1903, when she won a modest award. She was employed at various times in Washington, D.C., and during the 1880s she began to write for publication. Mrs. Darling’s Letters, or Memories of the Civil War (1883) was followed by A Social Diplomat and A Winning, Wayward Woman (both 1889), Senator Athens, C.S.A. (1889), Was It a Just Verdict? (1890), and others, and she also contributed romantic and sensational short stories to various magazines.

In 1890 Darling was one of the founding members of the DAR and was elected vice president general in charge of organization. It was ever afterward her claim that she and two friends had originated the idea for such an organization some months earlier and that she had issued the call for the October meeting. The DAR’s official history disputes the claim. Her talent for organization was put to good use in the early months of the society’s existence, but her instinct for controversy and self-dramatization soon brought her into conflict with the national board, and in the summer of 1891 she resigned and was removed from her office almost simultaneously. In November 1891 the Darling Chapter of the DAR in New York City followed her in reorganizing as the rival Daughters of the Revolution (DR). The DR differed from the DAR in insisting upon lineal rather than collateral descent from patriot forebears and upon strong state as opposed to national authority in the organization. In January 1892 Darling founded the Daughters of the United States of the War of 1812 (later the United States Daughters of 1812), of which she was for several years president. She published A War Episode, or The Darling Claim vs. the U.S. (1900); her own version of the DAR controversy, entitled Founding and Organization of the Daughters of the American Revolution and Daughters of the Revolution (1901); 1607–1907: Memories of Virginia (1907), a volume of verse; and The Senator’s Daughter (1907).Ford Madox Brown,  (born April 16, 1821, Calais, France-died October 6, 1893, London, England), English painter whose work is associated with that of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, although he was never a member.

Brown studied art from 1837 to 1839 in Bruges and Antwerp, Belgium. His early work is characterized by sombre colour and dramatic feeling suited to the Byronic subjects that he painted in Paris during 1840–43, such as Manfred on the Jungfrau (c. 1840) and Parisina’s Sleep (1842). Already concerned with the accurate representation of natural phenomena, he drew from corpses in University College Hospital in London when painting his Prisoner of Chillon (1843). During a visit to Italy in 1845, he met Peter von Cornelius, a member of the former Lukasbund, or Nazarenes. This meeting undoubtedly influenced both Brown’s palette and his style. His interest in brilliant, clear colour and neomedievalism first appears in Wyclif Reading His Translation of the Scriptures to John of Gaunt (1847). In 1848 Brown briefly accepted Dante Gabriel Rossetti as a pupil, and in 1850 Brown contributed to the Pre-Raphaelites’ magazine, Germ. Like William Holman Hunt, Brown painted in the open air to obtain naturalistic accuracy.

His most famous picture, Work (1852–63), which can be seen as a Victorian social document, was first exhibited at a retrospective exhibition held in London (1865), for which he wrote the catalog. He also worked as a book illustrator with William Morris; produced stained glass, at, among other sites, St. Oswald’s, Durham (1864–65); and between 1879 and 1893 completed a series of 12 murals for the Manchester town hall, depicting scenes from the city’s history.Francesco de Mura took the style to Turin, where he was court painter; Corrado Giaquinto, as court painter in Madrid, turned increasingly toward the Rococo, and Sebastiano Conca worked in Rome, falling increasingly victim to the academic classicism dominant there. Anton Domenico Gabbiani practiced a……centred around two great personalities, Sir Francis Seymour Haden and his brother-in-law, James McNeill Whistler. Haden was a Victorian country gentleman, a surgeon who loved and collected etchings. He started to make prints in his leisure time-and ultimately produced over 200 plates. His etchings, sensitively observed documentations of his environment,…François, marquis de Barbé-Marbois (born January 31, 1745, Metz, France-died January 14, 1837, Paris) French statesman who in 1803 negotiated the Louisiana Purchase by the United States.

After serving as a diplomat in Germany and with the American colonists, Barbé-Marbois was an intendant of Santo Domingo (1785–89). Returning to France, he became a deputy in the Council of Ancients (1795–97) but was exiled later as a monarchist to French Guiana (1797–99). Recalled to France in 1800, he became minister of the treasury and, as such, negotiated the sale of the Louisiana Territory to the United States, getting a better price than had been expected.

Napoleon dismissed Barbé-Marbois in 1806 because his excessive advances to contractors in 1805 had caused a grave financial crisis. He was, however, appointed first president of the Cour des Comptes (an administrative court handling public accounts of the country) in 1808 and was made a senator and a count in 1813. When Napoleon’s fall became likely, Barbé-Marbois hastily and successfully attached himself to the Bourbons and was made a peer of France (1814), a minister of justice (1815–16), a marquis (1817), and again president of the Cour des Comptes (1816–34). In 1834 he switched his loyalties to the July Monarchy of 1830.Fred Fisher (born Jan. 2, 1878, Sandusky, Ohio, U.S.-died July 14, 1941, Detroit) American automobile-body manufacturer. He was the eldest of 11 children and worked for his father, a carriage maker, before moving to Detroit in 1902. From 1908 to 1916 he and five of his brothers formed several companies that built bodies for cars. When merged in 1916 as Fisher Body Corp., it was producing almost 400,000 car bodies a year. In 1919 General Motors (GM) bought a majority interest in the company, and in 1926 it became a division of GM, though all the brothers retained management posts. Fred Fisher became a vice president of GM and retired in 1934.Frederic Bartlett,  (born October 20, 1886, Stow-on-the-Wold, Gloucestershire, England-died September 30, 1969, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire), British psychologist best known for his studies of memory.

Through his long association with University of Cambridge, Bartlett strongly influenced British psychological method, emphasizing a descriptive, or case study, approach over more statistical techniques. In 1922 he became director of the Cambridge Psychological Laboratory and in 1931 was appointed the university’s first professor of experimental psychology, retaining that position until his retirement in 1952. Bartlett was elected to the Royal Society in 1932 and was knighted in 1948.

In his major work, Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology (1932), Bartlett advanced the concept that memories of past events and experiences are actually mental reconstructions that are coloured by cultural attitudes and personal habits, rather than being direct recollections of observations made at the time. In experiments beginning in 1914, Bartlett showed that very little of an event is actually perceived at the time of its occurrence but that, in reconstructing the memory, gaps in observation or perception are filled in with the aid of previous experiences. A later work, Thinking: An Experimental and Social Study (1958), broke no new theoretical ground but added observations on the social character of human thinking.Frédéric Bastiat (born June 30, 1801, Mugron, near Bayonne, France-died December 24, 1850, Rome, Papal States [Italy]) French economist, best known for his journalistic writing in favour of free trade and the economics of Adam Smith.

In 1846 he founded the Associations for Free Trade and used its journal, Le Libre-Échange ("Free Trade"), to advance his antiprotectionist views. In a well-known satiric parable that appeared in his Sophismes économiques (1845; Sophisms of Protection), Bastiat concocted a petition brought by candlemakers who asked for protection against the Sun, suggesting that candlemaking and related industries would greatly profit if the Sun were eliminated as a competitor in furnishing light. Bastiat’s petition became so well known that modern economists often used it in their own defenses of free trade; indeed, Paul Samuelson put it at the head of one chapter in his best-selling textbook, Economics (1948). Bastiat also emphasized what he called the "unseen" consequences of government policy.

During the revolutionary years 1848–49 he wrote against the rise of socialism, which he identified with protectionism. It was primarily his campaign against socialism and communism that won him a seat in the Constituent Assembly in 1849 and in the subsequent Legislative Assembly of the same year. Economic theorist Joseph Schumpeter called Bastiat "the most brilliant economic journalist who ever lived."Frederic David Mocatta (born Jan. 15, 1828, London, Eng.-died  Jan. 16, 1905, London) British philanthropist, historian, bibliophile, and patron of learning who subsidized the publication of a number of major works of Jewish literature.

From 1857 to 1874, Mocatta directed the firm (founded by his grandfather) of Mocatta and Goldsmid, bullion brokers to the Bank of England. Upon retirement he devoted his time to charitable works-supporting better housing for workers, contributing money to almost every hospital in London, and promoting education. As a Jew, he was especially concerned with the plight of the Jewish poor.

Mocatta’s chief historical work is the survey The Jews of Spain and Portugal and the Inquisition (1877), which was later translated into several languages. Mocatta is perhaps best remembered as a patron of learning and as a bibliophile. He subsidized the publication of such major works as Zur Geschichte und Literatur (1845; "On History and Literature") by Leopold Zunz and the classic History of the Jews (1891–92), a condensed and updated translation of Heinrich Graetz’s Geschichte der Juden von den ältesten Zeiten bis auf die Gegenwart, 11 vol. (1853–76). Mocatta bequeathed his fine library of Jewish history and English Judaica to the University College of London. The Mocatta Library is administered jointly with the Jewish Historical Society of England, of which Mocatta was president from 1900 to 1902.Frederick J. Teggart,  (born May 9, 1870, Belfast, County Antrim, Ire.-died  Oct. 12, 1946, Berkeley, Calif., U.S.), Irish-born American historian who sought to apply scientific method to social and historical inquiry.

Teggart studied at Methodist College, Belfast, and Trinity College, Dublin; went to the United States in 1889; and studied at Stanford University (B.A., 1894). He taught history and political science at the University of California, Berkeley, and in 1919 founded the department of social institutions, remaining chairman until 1940. He explored social and historical theory in his first major works, Prolegomena to History (1916) and Theory of History (1925).

As a historian, Teggart sought, in the manner of a scientist, to relate isolated historical phenomena (datable events) to a general class of phenomena by means of comparison. In two works, The Processes of History (1918) and Rome and China (1939), he demonstrated correlations between datable events occurring contemporaneously in different cultures of the Eurasian landmass. The correlations thus established he held to be themselves historical facts susceptible to further scientific analysis.In 1942 Calvin married Genevieve Jemtegaard, with later Nobel chemistry laureate Glenn T. Seaborg as best man. The married couple collaborated on an interdisciplinary project to investigate the chemical factors in the Rh blood group system. Genevieve was a juvenile probation officer, but, according to Calvin’s autobiography, "she spent…
Sir George Grove,   (born Aug. 13, 1820, London-died  May 28, 1900, London), English writer on music famous for his multivolume Dictionary of Music and Musicians.

Grove began his career as a civil engineer and became secretary to the Society of Arts in 1850 and to the Crystal Palace in 1852. He collaborated with William Smith in his Dictionary of the Bible and was largely responsible for organizing the Palestine Exploration Fund in 1865. From 1856 to 1896 he wrote analytical notes for the Crystal Palace concerts; marked by enthusiasm, insight, and thoroughness, these established a standard in program commentary. In 1867 he visited Vienna with the composer Sir Arthur Sullivan and discovered the manuscripts for Schubert’s Rosamunde. He was editor of Macmillan’s Magazine from 1868 to 1883. During the years 1879–89 his Dictionary was published; in addition to supervising its contents, he contributed several articles to it.

In 1882 Grove became first director of the Royal College of Music and was knighted. His book Beethoven and His Nine Symphonies was published in 1896.      linguist George Lakoff. Among the many conflicting and controversial developments in this area, special mention may perhaps be made of attempts by Jerrold J. Katz, a U.S. grammarian-philosopher, and others to give a linguistic characterization of such fundamental logical notions as analyticity; the sketch by Montague…Gert Fröbe,  (born February 25, 1913, Zwickau, Saxony, Germany-died September 5, 1988, Munich, West Germany), German actor who epitomized the archvillain-especially for English-language audiences-after he took the role of the cruel megalomaniac Auric Goldfinger in the 1964 James Bond film Goldfinger. Fröbe also appeared in many different character roles in more than 100 mostly German-language films.

Before World War II, Fröbe worked in the German theatre as a violinist, a set designer, and an actor. During the war he was a medical orderly in the Red Cross in Vienna. Fröbe returned to the stage after the war and made his film debut in Berliner Ballade (1948; also called The Berliner). Despite his versatility, as exemplified by his zany performance as a Prussian general in Those Magnificent Men in Their Flying Machines (1965), Fröbe’s large build and his wide identification with such parts as that of Goldfinger or a Nazi soldier increasingly limited him to roles as a "heavy."…who ascended the throne as Ghiyāth al-Dīn Tughluq (reigned 1320–25), had distinguished himself prior to his accession by his successful defense of the frontier against the Mongols. His reign was brief but eventful. He captured Telingana, conducted raids in Jajnagar, and reconquered Bengal, which had been independent under Muslim kings…
In 1688 Grigory Dmitriyevich Stroganov (1650–1715) became the sole owner of all the family’s vast estates. He built and equipped two naval vessels for Peter I the Great and aided him financially. He was made a baron. In 1798 the tsar Paul I raised Grigory Dmitriyevich’s heirs…Guadalupe Victoria (born 1786, Tamazuela, Mex.-died 1843, Perote) Mexican soldier and political leader who was the first president of the Mexican Republic.

Victoria left law school to join the movement for independence from Spain, fighting under José María Morelos in 1812. He changed his name to show his devotion to the cause of Mexican independence (the image of the Virgin of Guadalupe, the patron saint of Mexico, had been adopted as a symbol of the insurgency). After the death of Morelos, Victoria waged guerrilla war against the Spaniards from the mountains around Veracruz and Puebla. When Agustín de Iturbide came to power (1821), Victoria at first supported him, but by 1822, as Iturbide arrested all political opponents and dissolved the legislature, Victoria denounced him and joined Antonio López de Santa Anna’s successful revolt in 1823.

Victoria became Mexico’s first elected president (1824–29), but, while honest, unassuming, and a courageous general, he was not particularly suited for the presidency. The inexperienced administrator was not able to deal effectively with the constant political bickering and Byzantine machinations of government rivals, often being taken advantage of by those he trusted. It is small wonder that little progress was made domestically and the economy was in a shambles. During Victoria’s tenure in office, Iturbide was executed. In foreign affairs, Victoria managed much better and established relations with all the major powers. The bitterest blow of his term came in 1827 when his vice president, Nicolás Bravo, led a revolt against Victoria. It was easily suppressed by his comrades from revolutionary times, Generals Santa Anna and Vicente Guerrero.Guarino Veronese (born 1374, Verona, March of Verona [Italy]-died December 14, 1460, Ferrara, Duchy of Ferrara) Italian humanist and Classical scholar, one of the pioneers of Greek studies in Renaissance western Europe and foremost teacher of humanistic scholars.

Following studies in Italy and the establishment of his first school in Verona in the 1390s, Guarino studied at Constantinople (1403–08), where he was a pupil of Manuel Chrysoloras. Returning to Italy with a valuable collection of Greek manuscripts, he taught Greek at Florence (1410) and Venice (1414) and compiled Regulae grammaticales (1418), the first Renaissance Latin grammar. It appeared in numerous editions and was used well into the 17th century. After two terms as master of rhetoric in Verona, Guarino became tutor to Leonello, son of Nicolò d’Este, lord of Ferrara, in 1430. Guarino prepared new editions of various Latin authors and translated works of Strabo and Plutarch. His linguistic talents were employed by Greek and Latin churchmen at the Council of Ferrara-Florence (1438–45). With his colleague Gasparino da Barzizza and former pupil Vittorino da Feltre, Guarino helped set the pattern for studies in humanism.Gunnar Ekelöf,  (born Sept. 15, 1907, Stockholm-died  March 16, 1968, Sigtuna, Swed.), outstanding Swedish poet and essayist.

Ekelöf exerted great influence on his contemporaries. His radically modern style was influenced by such poets as Charles Baudelaire, Arthur Rimbaud, Ezra Pound, and T.S. Eliot. In such poetry from the 1930s as Sent på jorden (1932; "Late on Earth"), Ekelöf was drawn to the Surrealist technique of automatism (the spontaneous release of the subconscious in the creative act), but his work also reflects an interest in musical forms and Oriental mysticism. A student of Oriental languages, Ekelöf felt divided between mystical tendencies and rationalism. This conflict is apparent in Färjesång (1941; "Ferry Song") and Non Serviam (1945; "I Will Not Serve"). Central to Ekelöf’s work is En Mölna-elegi (1960; "A Mölna Elegy"), published in several earlier versions from the mid-1940s. Its starting point is within the mind of the poet, sitting at Mölna dock on a summer day in 1940. Memories from his individual past intermingle with those of history in an endless panorama.

In the 1950s Ekelöf turned away from finished compositions to work in fragmentary forms, as in Strountes (1955; "Nonsense"). The last decade of his work is dominated by the Akritas trilogy, Dīwān över Fursten av Emgión (1965; "Diwan over the Prince of Emgión"), Sagan om Fatumeh (1966; "The Tale of Fatumeh"; Eng. trans., Selected Poems), and Vägvisare till underjorden (1967; Guide to the Underworld). The trilogy contains Ekelöf’s finest poetic expression of the simultaneous experience of presence and transitoriness. In 1958 Ekelöf became a member of the Swedish Royal Academy.Gustavo Gutiérrez,   (born June 8, 1928, Lima, Peru),  Roman Catholic theologian and Dominican priest who is considered the father of liberation theology, which emphasizes a Christian duty to aid the poor and oppressed through involvement in civic and political affairs.

Ordained a priest in 1959, Gutiérrez had previously earned a degree in medicine from the National University of Peru in Lima (1950). He also studied philosophy and psychology at the Catholic University of Leuven (Louvain [Belgium]) and theology at the Catholic University of Lyon (France) and at the Gregorian University in Rome. He earned a doctorate in theology at Lyon in 1985. Gutiérrez served as parish priest in the Iglesia Cristo Redentor (Christ the Redeemer church) in Rimac, Peru, and in 1974 he founded and directed the Bartolomé de Las Casas Institute in Lima to minister to the poor. He also taught at the Pontifical University of Peru and at many colleges and universities in Europe and North America, including the University of Notre Dame in Indiana.

The author of numerous books and articles, Gutiérrez is perhaps best known for his Teología de la liberación (1971; A Theology of Liberation), the foundational text of liberation theology. In that work, Gutiérrez developed a new spirituality based on solidarity with the poor and called on the church to help change existing social and economic institutions to promote social justice. Although liberation theology had great impact, especially in Latin America, it was less welcome in Rome because of its Marxist overtones, and Pope John Paul II accordingly sought to limit its influence in the 1980s.

Gutiérrez was granted numerous honorary degrees and awards from institutions throughout the world. In 1993 he was made a member of the French Legion of Honour, in 1995 he was named to the Peruvian Academy of Language, and in 2002 he was inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Gutiérrez’s other books included El Dios de la vida (1983; The God of Life), Beber en su propio pozo: en el itinerario espiritual de un pueblo (1983; We Drink from Our Own Wells: The Spiritual Journey of a People), Hablar de Dios desde el sufrimiento del inocente: una reflexión sobre el libro de Job (1986; On Job: God-Talk and the Suffering of the Innocent), and En busca de los pobres de Jesucristo: el pensamiento de Bartolomé de Las Casas (1992; Las Casas: In Search of the Poor of Jesus Christ).Hannibal Sehested  (born 1609, Ösel, Swedish Estonia [now Saaremaa, Estonia]-died  Sept. 23, 1666, Paris) statesman who achieved partial autonomy for Norway under Denmark and who laid the basis for the modernization of Denmark’s administrative system.

After foreign travels in 1629–32, Sehested was attached to the court of King Christian IV of Denmark and Norway. He was given charge of the unsuccessful 1635 negotiations with Sweden. He became a member of the Rigsråd (Council of the Realm) in 1640 and was named stadholder (governor) of Norway in 1642, the year of his marriage to Christian IV’s sister Christiane.

In Christian IV’s second war with Sweden (1643–45), Sehested invaded Sweden several times and ably defended Norway from Swedish attack. He steadily improved Norway’s resources and capacity for self-government, and in 1646–47 he won for Norway partial control of its finances, the revenues being used for military expenses and war debts.

Accused by his Rigsråd rivals of embezzlement after the king’s death in 1648, Sehested was forced to surrender his estates to the crown. He retired from the council in 1651 and lived abroad in 1651–58. His offers of service were spurned by Frederick III at the start of a new war with Sweden (1657–60), and Sehested then went to Sweden, in an action approaching treason. Later he was allowed to return to Denmark and negotiate the Treaty of Copenhagen with the Swedes (1660), a treaty that was advantageous to Denmark.

Back in royal favour, Sehested became lord high treasurer and again a state councillor. He dramatically modernized Denmark’s state administration, establishing, for example, colleges for the various branches of government.Harold Peary,  (born July 25, 1908, San Leandro, California, U.S.-died March 30, 1985, Torrance, California), American actor. He created the colourful, arrogant character Throckmorton P. Gildersleeve on the hit radio comedy series Fibber McGee and Molly in 1937. He starred in his own popular serial, The Great Gildersleeve (1941–50), considered the first spin-off created from another series. He later acted in television series such as Blondie (1957) and Fibber McGee and Molly (1959), and he appeared in the film Clambake (1967). Peary continued to perform on radio and TV into the 1970s.Sir Hector Macdonald,  (born April 13, 1853, Rootfield, Urquhart, Moray, Scot.-died  March 25, 1903, Paris), British soldier who won the rare distinction of rising from the ranks to major general. The son of a crofter-mason, he enlisted as a private in the Gordon Highlanders at the age of 18. In 1879 Macdonald took part in the Second Afghan War, where he gained a reputation for resourcefulness and daring. By the end of the campaign, he was nicknamed "Fighting Mac" and promoted to second lieutenant. Returning to Britain by way of southern Africa, he saw action in the First Boer War (1880–81). At the Battle of Majuba Hill (Feb. 27, 1881) he was conspicuously courageous.

From 1883 to 1898, Macdonald served in Egypt and the Sudan, taking part in the Nile expedition (1885) as a member of the Egyptian constabulary. Transferring to the Egyptian army as captain in 1888, he demonstrated an extraordinary talent for command during the Sudanese campaign (1888–91). When Kitchener undertook the reconquest of the Sudan in 1896, he placed Macdonald in command of an Egyptian brigade, which he handled so outstandingly at the critical Battle of Omdurman (Sept. 2, 1898) that he became a national hero and was given the thanks of Parliament. As a major general commanding the Highland Brigade in the South African War (1899–1902), "Fighting Mac" contributed much to Boer defeats at Paardeberg and Brandwater. In 1902 he was given charge of the troops in Ceylon (modern Sri Lanka). Confronted by an "opprobrious accusation" (apparently a charge of homosexual practices), he shot himself.Henry Crabb Robinson,   (born May 13, 1775, Bury St. Edmunds, Suffolk, Eng.-died  Feb. 5, 1867, London), English man of letters whose voluminous diaries provide valuable information on life in the Romantic and early Victorian periods and give lively portraits of its literary personalities.

Living in London from 1796, Robinson practiced law as a barrister on the Norfolk circuit (1813–28). He also served as foreign correspondent for The Times of London (1807–09) and became involved in the antislavery campaign and in the founding of the University of London. He befriended William Blake, of whose last years Robinson’s diaries give the fullest account. He also knew Charles Lamb, William and Dorothy Wordsworth, and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, of whose lectures he made notes. In Germany (1800–05) he met the leading poets and thinkers of his day, including J.W. von Goethe, Friedrich von Schiller, and J.G. von Herder; on his return to England, he was influential in making German literature and philosophy more widely known.

His diaries were first published in 1869. Collections of his correspondence with the Wordsworth circle (1927), about Germany (1929), and about books and writers (1938) were edited by E.J. Morley.Henry Deringer (born Oct. 26, 1786, Easton, Pa., U.S.-died  1868) American gunsmith who was the inventor of the Derringer pistol. He was the son of Henry Deringer, Sr., a colonial gunsmith who made Kentucky rifles.

The younger Deringer began his career as an apprentice to a firearms maker in Richmond, Va. In 1806 he settled in Philadelphia and began his own arms-manufacturing plant. He won contracts to supply various types of guns to the United States government. His early percussion-cap pistols were long-barreled weapons that were designed to fit a belt. After 1825 he concentrated on making single-shot pistols. His small caplock pocket pistol became his most famous product. This pistol was easy to handle and accurate at short ranges. It was less than six inches long and was bored in calibres from .36 to .45, with .41 being the most common. This model was copied by many other manufacturers and was quite popular between the 1840s and the American Civil War. It was manufactured and sold into the late 20th century by Colt and others, often in .22 calibre, and sometimes gold-plated.

John Wilkes Booth used a Deringer pocket pistol to assassinate President Abraham Lincoln. A reporter assembling the details called the gun a "Derringer" pistol in his story, adding an extra "r." This incorrect spelling was widely repeated, and the pistol became known as the derringer.Henryk Dembiński,  (born May 3, 1791, Kraków, Pol.-died June 13, 1864, Paris, France), Polish soldier and revolutionary leader. Dembiński was the chief military commander in the Polish revolt of 1830–31, and he served as commander in chief of the Hungarian army during the Hungarian revolution of 1848–49.

Dembiński was a student at the Vienna Academy of Engineering from 1807 to 1809. He then served as an officer of the duchy of Warsaw until 1814. For his leadership at the Battle of Leipzig, Dembiński was awarded the cross of the Legion of Honour. During the Polish revolt, he was considered the hero of the battle against the Russians at Ostrołęka.

Upon the defeat of the revolt, Dembiński went into exile in Paris. During that time he worked to create Polish units within the Spanish, Turkish, and Egyptian armies. In January 1849 he was recruited by Count László Teleki to command the Hungarian armies in the upper Transtisza, the region east of the Tisza River, and in central Hungary. Later that month he arrived in Hungary, but, following a defeat at the Battle of Kápolna (February 26–27) and protests from the officers’ ranks, he temporarily ceded his position to Artúr Görgei. When the Russian imperial troops attacked, however, Dembiński took command of the entire Hungarian army. On August 5, near Szőreg, he suffered defeat by Austrian troops led by Julius von Haynau  and was forced to retreat. Instead of joining Görgei at Arad (now in Romania), Dembiński marched toward Temesvár (now Timișoara, Rom.), and during the battle of Temesvár he handed over command on August 9 to another Polish general, Józef Zachariasz Bem. After this defeat he left the country along with other members of the government. He first sought asylum in the Ottoman Empire and then moved to Paris in 1850.…1031, when the puppet ruler Hishām III was deposed by his viziers and the caliphate disintegrated into the so-called kingdoms of the taifa. During this century there were 12 caliphs, all except the first two of whom were puppets and most of whom died by violence.Howard R. Garis,  (born April 25, 1873, Binghamton, New York, U.S.-died November 6, 1962, Amherst, Massachusetts), American author, creator of the Uncle Wiggily series of children’s stories.

Garis began his career as a newspaperman with the Newark Evening News in 1896. Shortly after, he began writing a daily bedtime story about Uncle Wiggily-a rabbit hero-and his friends. He averaged a story a day (except Sunday) until he retired in 1947. In all, he turned out more than 15,000 stories and about 500 books.Hugh Foot (born Oct. 8, 1907, Plymouth, Devon, Eng.-died  Sept. 5, 1990, near Plymouth) was a British diplomat who led British colonies to their independence.

Foot was the son of a Liberal member of Parliament, and his three brothers were also elected to Parliament. After attending the University of Cambridge (B.A., 1929) Foot entered the civil administrative service. After postings in Palestine (1929–37) and Transjordan (1939–43), he joined the army as a lieutenant colonel in charge of the military administration of Cyrenaica (1943). He then served as colonial secretary of Cyprus (1943–45) and colonial secretary and governor of Jamaica (1945–47). As chief secretary of Nigeria (1947–50) he was a steadying presence while the idea of independence grew.

Foot returned to Jamaica in 1951 and stayed until 1957 as captain general and governor in chief. As governor and commander in chief of Cyprus (1957–60) he encouraged agreement between warring Greek and Turkish factions and planned for peaceable independent rule, which Cyprus achieved in 1960. As Britain’s representative to the United Nations (1961–62), Foot became principal adviser on emerging countries, but resigned (1962) in protest against Britain’s Rhodesian policy. In 1964, the year he was made a life peer, he was appointed a permanent United Kingdom representative to the UN; he served until 1970. His autobiography A Start in Freedom was published in 1964.Hugh of Saint-Cher,  (born c. 1200, Saint-Cher, France-died March 19, 1263, Orvieto, Papal States [now in Italy]), French cardinal and biblical commentator best known for his work in correcting and indexing the Latin version of the Bible.

Hugh was lecturer in philosophy, theology, and canon law at the University of Paris when he became a Dominican in 1226. In 1230 he became master of theology in Paris. He twice served as provincial of his order in France (1227–30; 1236–44) and was vicar-general (1240–41); his leadership contributed largely to the Dominicans’ prosperity. He won the confidence of the popes Gregory IX, Innocent IV, and Alexander IV, and in 1244 he was made a cardinal. He played an important part in the Council of Lyon (1245), contributed to the institution of the Feast of Corpus Christi, and helped revise the Carmelite rule (1247). In 1255 Hugh was charged with the examination of the Introductorius in Evangelium aeternum of Gherardino del Borgo San Donnino, an exposition on the teachings of Joachim of Fiore, and in 1256 he examined William of Saint-Amour’s De periculis novissimorum temporum ("On the Dangers of Recent Times"), a condemnation of the mendicant orders. Both authors were condemned.

From 1256 to 1263 he directed the first revision, or Correctorium, of the Vulgate, begun in 1236 by the Dominicans. This Correctorium, which attracted vigorous criticism from Roger Bacon, after several revisions formed the basis of the celebrated Correctorium Sorbonicum. He started the first concordance of the Latin Bible-generally known as Concordantiae Sancti Jacobi, from the name of the Dominican house in Paris-and wrote numerous Postillae, or commentaries, on the Bible. His Sermones de tempore et sanctis are apparently only extracts. An eight-volume collection of his exegetical works was published in Venice in 1754.Ibn Muqlah (born 886, Baghdad [now in Iraq]-died  940, Baghdad) one of the foremost calligraphers of the ʿAbbāsid Age (750–1258), reputed inventor of the first cursive style of Arabic lettering, the naskhī script, which replaced the angular Kūfic as the standard of Islamic calligraphy. In the naskhī script Ibn Muqlah introduced the rounded forms and curved lines that in later styles were refined to give Arabic writing the flowing beauty for which it is renowned. Although naskhī was originally intended for use in copying the Qurʾān, by the 11th century it was used widely for royal and common correspondence and as architectural decoration.

Among the other scripts invented by Ibn Muqlah were the tawqī and the more elegant thuluth. In addition to his calligraphic work, Ibn Muqlah led a colourful political life. He was appointed vizier three times, and three times he lost that office for being involved in political intrigue. The third time, he was sentenced to life in prison, where he died in 940.Ignaz Semmelweis (born July 1, 1818, Buda, Hungary, Austrian Empire [now Budapest, Hungary]-died August 13, 1865, Vienna, Austria) Hungarian physician who discovered the cause of puerperal (childbed) fever and introduced antisepsis into medical practice.

Educated at the universities of Pest and Vienna, Semmelweis received his doctor’s degree from Vienna in 1844 and was appointed assistant at the obstetric clinic in Vienna. He soon became involved in the problem of puerperal infection, the scourge of maternity hospitals throughout Europe. Although most women delivered at home, those who had to seek hospitalization because of poverty, illegitimacy, or obstetrical complications faced mortality rates ranging as high as 25–30 percent. Some thought that the infection was induced by overcrowding, poor ventilation, the onset of lactation, or miasma. Semmelweis proceeded to investigate its cause over the strong objections of his chief, who, like other continental physicians, had reconciled himself to the idea that the disease was unpreventable.

Semmelweis observed that, among women in the first division of the clinic, the death rate from childbed fever was two or three times as high as among those in the second division, although the two divisions were identical with the exception that students were taught in the first and midwives in the second. He put forward the thesis that perhaps the students carried something to the patients they examined during labour. The death of a friend from a wound infection incurred during the examination of a woman who died of puerperal infection and the similarity of the findings in the two cases gave support to his reasoning. He concluded that students who came directly from the dissecting room to the maternity ward carried the infection from mothers who had died of the disease to healthy mothers. He ordered the students to wash their hands in a solution of chlorinated lime before each examination.

Under these procedures, the mortality rates in the first division dropped from 18.27 to 1.27 percent, and in March and August of 1848 no woman died in childbirth in his division. The younger medical men in Vienna recognized the significance of Semmelweis’s discovery and gave him all possible assistance. His superior, on the other hand, was critical-not because he wanted to oppose him but because he failed to understand him.

In the year 1848 a liberal political revolution swept Europe, and Semmelweis took part in the events in Vienna. After the revolution had been put down, Semmelweis found that his political activities had increased the obstacles to his professional work. In 1849 he was dropped from his post at the clinic. He then applied for a teaching post at the university in midwifery but was turned down. Soon after that, he gave a successful lecture at the Medical Society of Vienna entitled "The Origin of Puerperal Fever." At the same time, he applied once more for the teaching post, but, although he received it, there were restrictions attached to it that he considered humiliating. He left Vienna and returned to Pest in 1850.

He worked for the next six years at the St. Rochus Hospital in Pest. An epidemic of puerperal fever had broken out in the obstetrics department, and, at his request, Semmelweis was put in charge of the department. His measures promptly reduced the mortality rate, and in his years there it averaged only 0.85 percent. In Prague and Vienna, meantime, the rate was still from 10 to 15 percent.

In 1855 he was appointed professor of obstetrics at the University of Pest. He married, had five children, and developed his private practice. His ideas were accepted in Hungary, and the government addressed a circular to all district authorities ordering the introduction of the prophylactic methods of Semmelweis. In 1857 he declined the chair of obstetrics at the University of Zürich. Vienna remained hostile toward him, and the editor of the Wiener Medizinische Wochenschrift wrote that it was time to stop the nonsense about the chlorine hand wash.

In 1861 Semmelweis published his principal work, Die Ätiologie, der Begriff und die Prophylaxis des Kindbettfiebers (The Etiology, Concept, and Prophylaxis of Childbed Fever). He sent it to all the prominent obstetricians and medical societies abroad, but the general reaction was adverse. The weight of authority stood against his teachings. He addressed several open letters to professors of medicine in other countries but to little effect. His letters grew increasingly offensive, with expressions of anger, frustration, and bitterness. At a conference of German physicians and natural scientists, most of the speakers-including the pathologist Rudolf Virchow-rejected his doctrine.

From 1861 onward Semmelweis’s mental health deteriorated. The years of controversy had gradually undermined his spirit, and he suffered bouts of severe depression. By 1865 his behaviour had become increasingly erratic, possibly because of dementia or advanced syphilis. His colleagues eventually enticed him to visit a mental institution, whereupon Semmelweis, realizing his colleagues’ intent, protested and attempted to leave but was taken in by the guards. He was beaten severely, placed under confinement, and subjected to treatments with castor oil. He died two weeks into his detention at the asylum. Ironically, his illness and death were caused by the infection of a wound on his right hand, possibly acquired when he was beaten by the guards. An autopsy revealed that he had died of the same disease against which he had struggled all his professional life.

Semmelweis’s doctrine was subsequently accepted by medical science. His influence on the development of knowledge and control of infection was hailed by Joseph Lister, the father of modern antisepsis: "I think with the greatest admiration of him and his achievement and it fills me with joy that at last he is given the respect due to him."Imruʾ al-Qays,  (died c. 500), Arab poet, acknowledged as the most distinguished poet of pre-Islamic times by the Prophet Muhammad, by ʿAlī, the fourth caliph, and by Arab critics of the ancient Basra school. He is the author of one of the seven odes in the famed collection of pre-Islamic poetry Al-Muʿallaqāt.

There is no agreement as to his genealogy, but the predominant legend cites Imruʾ al-Qays as the youngest son of Ḥujr, the last king of Kindah. He was twice expelled from his father’s court for the erotic poetry he was fond of writing, and he assumed the life of a vagabond. After his father was murdered by a rebel Bedouin tribe, the Banū Asad, Imruʾ al-Qays was single-minded in his pursuit of revenge. He successfully attacked and routed the Banū Asad, but, unsatisfied, he went from tribe to tribe fruitlessly seeking further help. Through King al-Ḥārith of Ghassān (northern Arabia), Imruʾ al-Qays was introduced to the Byzantine emperor Justinian I, who agreed to supply him with the troops that he needed to regain his kingdom. Legend has it that on his return to Arabia the emperor sent him a poisoned cloak, which caused his death at Ancyra (modern Ankara).

The philologists of the Basra school regarded Imruʾ al-Qays not only as the greatest of the poets of the Muʿallaqāt but also as the inventor of the form of the classical ode, or qaṣīdah, and of many of its conventions, such as the poet’s weeping over the traces of deserted campsites. The opening of the long qaṣīdah by Imruʾ al-Qays that appears in the Muʿallaqāt is perhaps the best-known line of poetry in Arabic:

The hunting scenes and bluntly erotic narratives by Imruʾ al-Qays in the Muʿallaqāt represent important early precedents of the genres of hunt poetry and love poetry in Arabic literature.

There were at least three collections (divans) of his poetry made by medieval Arab scholars, numbering as many as 68 poems; the authenticity of the greater part of them, however, is doubtful.…influential model of American psychiatrist Irvin D. Yalom provides a good example of such therapies. In this approach the therapist continually encourages the patients to direct their attention to the personal interactions occurring within the group rather than to what happened in the past to individual members or events currently…Isabel Colegate (born September 10, 1931, London, England-died March 12, 2023) was a British author of novels about life among the upper classes in England during the 20th century.

At the age of 19 Colegate began working as an assistant to literary agent Anthony Blond. When Blond became a publisher, one of the first books he brought was Colgate’s first novel, The Blackmailer (1958). Her next, A Man of Power (1960), portrays a newly rich businessman who abandons his wife and then is duped by the aristocrat whom he loves. Among her subsequent novels are the partly autobiographical The Great Occasion (1962) and Statues in a Garden (1964), which details the ramifications of an affair between a young man and his aunt.

Orlando King (1968), Orlando at the Brazen Threshold (1971), and Agatha (1973) constitute Colegate’s modern retelling of the myth of Oedipus and Antigone set during the rise of fascism, World War II, and the 1956 Suez Crisis.

Colegate’s The Shooting Party (1980) is about a group of aristocrats who are gathered for a weekend pheasant hunt. Her best-known novel, it was adapted as a movie first shown at Cannes in 1984 and then widely released in 1985.

Colegate’s other fiction includes News from the City of the Sun (1979), an investigation of a utopian commune; Deceits of Time (1988), concerning a biographer’s unpleasant revelations about her subject; and The Summer of the Royal Visit (1991), about the conditions in Bath during the Victorian era. Winter Journey (1995) delves into the relationship between an aging brother and sister through their reminisces during a holiday together.

A Glimpse of Sion’s Glory (1985) is a short-story collection. A Pelican in the Wilderness: Hermits, Solitaries, and Recluses (2002), a work of nonfiction, is Colegate’s personal consideration of solitude and its permutations throughout history.Isabella Stewart Gardner (born April 14, 1840, New York, New York, U.S.-died July 17, 1924, Boston, Massachusetts) eclectic American socialite and art collector, a patron of many arts, remembered largely for the distinctive collection of European and Asian artworks that she assembled in Boston.

Isabella Stewart was the daughter of a wealthy businessman. In 1860 she married John L. Gardner, a member of a prominent and long-established Boston family. She adopted his city as her own, but Boston’s Brahmin society failed to reciprocate this openness. Her household was a quiet one until the 1870s, when, after a bout of illness and despondency and an exhilarating European convalescence, she began arranging social affairs that dazzled and occasionally titillated conservative Boston. A brilliant and unconventional woman, she attracted musicians, artists, and actors, and she came close to scandalizing Boston society by attending boxing matches. She became known as a patron of the Boston Symphony and of countless music students, for whom she once arranged a private recital by the pianist Ignacy Paderewski. She also developed a deep interest in the visual arts.

Advised by art critic Bernard Berenson, her onetime protégé, Gardner began collecting paintings and objets d’art and with her husband made numerous trips to Europe and Asia to add to her collection. After her husband’s death in 1898 she continued her interest in art, eventually assembling a fine collection of Renaissance and Dutch masterpieces interspersed with sculpture, Asian art, and major works by contemporaries such as John Singer Sargent and James McNeill Whistler.

In 1899 she began to build a gallery in the form of an imitation 15th-century Italian villa on Fenway Court in Boston. She took an active part in the design and even the construction of the building, in which she arranged her art collection along with personal memorabilia. Opened to the public in January 1903, it was a fitting monument to one of the most exceptional women of the time. In accordance with her will, the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum was given to Boston as a public institution, with the proviso that the collection be maintained precisely as she had arranged it; nothing was to be added, removed, or rearranged. In 2009 a Massachusetts court overruled the strict terms of her will, allowing for an expansion that included a new building designed by Italian architect Renzo Piano, which was completed in 2012.Jackson Haines (born 1840, New York, New York, U.S.-died January 1876, Finland) American skater known as the father of figure skating. A ballet dancer, he adapted ballet styles and techniques to a sport that had previously comprised a limited number of figures executed in a tight, awkward manner.

(Read Scott Hamilton’s Britannica entry on figure skating.)

Having won the U.S. men’s figure-skating championship, he went to Europe in 1865. Although his skating style (called International) was rejected in the United States and England, he became a great popular success in Sweden, Austria, and elsewhere on the Continent. In Vienna, the world’s "waltz capital" in the 19th century, he astutely offered instruction in waltzing on ice. Skating schools founded or inspired by Haines sprang up in numerous countries. On a journey by sled from St. Petersburg to Stockholm, he contracted pneumonia and died.Jackson Pollock (born January 28, 1912, Cody, Wyoming, U.S.-died August 11, 1956, East Hampton, New York) was an American painter who was a leading exponent of Abstract Expressionism, an art movement characterized by the free-associative gestures in paint sometimes referred to as "action painting." During his lifetime he received widespread publicity and serious recognition for the radical poured, or "drip," technique he used to create his major works. Among his contemporaries, he was respected for his deeply personal and totally uncompromising commitment to the art of painting. His work and example had enormous influence on them and on many subsequent art movements in the United States. He is also one of the first American painters to be recognized during his lifetime and after as a peer of 20th-century European masters of modern art.

Paul Jackson Pollock was the fifth and youngest son of Stella May McClure and LeRoy Pollock, who were both of Scotch-Irish extraction (LeRoy’s original surname was McCoy before his adoption about 1890 by a family named Pollock) and born and raised in Iowa. The family left Cody, Wyoming, 11 months after Jackson’s birth; he would know Cody only through family photographs. Over the next 16 years his family lived in California and Arizona, eventually moving nine times. In 1928 they moved to Los Angeles, where Pollock enrolled at Manual Arts High School. There he came under the influence of Frederick John de St. Vrain Schwankovsky, a painter and illustrator who was also a member of the Theosophical Society, a sect that promoted metaphysical and occult spirituality. Schwankovsky gave Pollock some rudimentary training in drawing and painting, introduced him to advanced currents of European modern art, and encouraged his interest in theosophical literature. At this time Pollock, who had been raised an agnostic, also attended the camp meetings of the former messiah of the theosophists, Jiddu Krishnamurti, a personal friend of Schwankovsky. These spiritual explorations prepared him to embrace the theories of the Swiss psychologist Carl Jung and the exploration of unconscious imagery in his paintings in subsequent years.

In the fall of 1930 Pollock followed his brother Charles, who left home to study art in 1922, to New York City, where he enrolled at the Art Students League under his brother’s teacher, the regionalist painter Thomas Hart Benton. (Jackson dropped his first name, Paul, about the time he went to New York in 1930.) He studied life drawing, painting, and composition with Benton for the next two and one-half years, leaving the league in the early months of 1933. For the next two years Pollock lived in poverty, first with Charles and, by the fall of 1934, with his brother Sanford. He would share an apartment in Greenwich Village with Sanford and his wife until 1942.

Pollock was employed by the WPA Federal Art Project in the fall of 1935 as an easel painter. This position gave him economic security during the remaining years of the Great Depression as well as an opportunity to develop his art. From his years with Benton through 1938, Pollock’s work was strongly influenced by the compositional methods and regionalist subject matter of his teacher and by the poetically expressionist vision of the American painter Albert Pinkham Ryder. It consisted mostly of small landscapes and figurative scenes such as Going West (1934–35), in which Pollock utilized motifs derived from photographs of his birthplace at Cody.

In 1937 Pollock began psychiatric treatment for alcoholism, and he suffered a nervous breakdown in 1938, which caused him to be institutionalized for about four months. After these experiences, his work became semiabstract and showed the assimilation of motifs from the modern Spanish artists Pablo Picasso and Joan Miró, as well as the Mexican muralist José Clemente Orozco. Jungian symbolism and the Surrealist exploration of the unconscious also influenced his works of this period; indeed, from 1939 through 1941 he was in treatment with two successive Jungian psychoanalysts who used Pollock’s own drawings in the therapy sessions. Characteristic paintings from this period include Bird (c. 1941), Male and Female (c. 1942), and Guardians of the Secret (1943).

In 1943, after the liquidation of the Federal Art Project, Pollock was given a contract by Peggy Guggenheim at her Art of This Century gallery in New York, and his first one-man show was held there in November. Very late in 1943, possibly in the early weeks of 1944, Pollock painted his first wall-size work, called Mural (c. 1943–44). This painting represents Pollock’s breakthrough into a totally personal style in which Benton’s compositional methods and energetic linear invention are fused with the Surrealist free association of motifs and unconscious imagery. Pollock’s evolution from this point throughout the 1940s shows a struggle to find a process by which he could translate his entire personality into painting. The figurative character of works such as Totem Lesson 1 (1944) and The Blue Unconscious (1946) contrasts with the heavily painted, all-over design of Shimmering Substance (1946) and Eyes in the Heat (1946), indicating the range of imagery and technique he employed during this period.

In 1945 Pollock married the painter Lee Krasner and moved to East Hampton, on the southern shore of Long Island, New York. Krasner, whom Pollock respected as an artist, had already proven her ability to handle his affairs with Guggenheim. She also provided a stabilizing factor that he sorely needed, given his drinking and social awkwardness.Jacob Glatstein (born Aug. 20, 1896, Lublin, Pol.-died Nov. 19, 1971, New York, N.Y., U.S.) Polish-born poet and literary critic who in 1920 helped establish the Inzikhist ("Introspectivist") literary movement. In later years he was one of the outstanding figures in mid-20th-century American Yiddish literature.

Glatstein immigrated to the United States in 1914 and studied law at New York University. His early poems were published in Poezye (1919). In 1920 he, N.B. Minkoff, and Arn Glanz-Leyeles published "Introspektivizm," the manifesto of the literary group In Zikh ("In Oneself" or "Introspection"). In the 1920s Glatstein edited and wrote for In zikh, the modernist journal of the Inzikhist poets (also called Di Inzikhistn), who, influenced by psychoanalytic theories of the unconscious and by stream-of-consciousness narrative technique, celebrated personal experience in free and naturalist verse, rejecting traditional, stylized lyricism and metric elegance. His volume Yankev Glatshteyn (1921) was the first collection of Yiddish poems written solely in free verse. Glatstein experimented with Yiddish, exploring its poetic limits, using popular speech rhythms, coining new words, and engaging in inventive wordplay. His later poetry, although eclectic in rhythm and content, retains a playful sense of irony and use of folk idiom.

From 1938 Glatstein turned increasingly to elegiac verse mourning the destruction of traditional Jewish life in eastern Europe, as in the poem "A gute nakht, velt" ("Good Night, World"). His 12 poetry collections include Fraye ferzn (1926; "Free Verses"), Dem tatns shotn (1953; "The Father’s Shadow"), Di freyd fun yidishn vort (1961; "The Joy of the Yiddish Word"), and A Yid fun Lublin (1966; "A Jew from Lublin"). Two autobiographical novels are Ven Yash iz geforen (1938; When Yash Set Out) and Ven Yash iz gekumen (1940; "When Yash Arrived"; Homecoming at Twilight). His collected essays include the two-volume In tokh genumen (1947–56; "The Heart of the Matter"). In 1956 he published a retrospective of his poetry, Fun mayn gantser mi ("From My Whole Toil"). Glatstein also was a columnist and critic for the New York Yiddish daily newspaper Der Morgnzhurnal  ("Morning Journal") and the weekly Yiddisher kemfer ("Jewish Fighter"). He has been widely translated.James II (born October 14, 1633, London, England-died September 5/6 [September 16/17, New Style], 1701, Saint-Germain, France) king of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1685 to 1688, and the last Stuart monarch in the direct male line. He was deposed in the Glorious Revolution (1688–89) and replaced by William III and Mary II. That revolution, engendered by James’s Roman Catholicism, permanently established Parliament as the ruling power of England.

James II was the second surviving son of Charles I and Henrietta Maria. He was formally created duke of York in January 1644. During the English Civil Wars he lived at Oxford-from October 1642 until the city surrendered in June 1646. He was then removed by order of Parliament to St. James’s Palace, from which he escaped to the Netherlands in April 1648. He rejoined his mother in France in early 1649. Joining the French army in April 1652, he served in four campaigns under the great French general the vicomte de Turenne, who commended his courage and ability. When his brother Charles II concluded an alliance with Spain against France in 1656 he reluctantly changed sides, and he commanded the right wing of the Spanish army at the Battle of the Dunes in June 1658.

After the restoration of his brother Charles II to the English throne in 1660, James was created duke of Albany. He became lord high admiral and did much to maintain the efficiency and improve the organization of the navy. He also showed considerable interest in colonial ventures; it was on his initiative that New Amsterdam was seized from the Dutch in 1664 and renamed New York in his honour. He commanded the fleet in the opening campaigns of the Second and Third Dutch wars. This was to be his last taste of active military command until 1688.

In politics he was a strong supporter of the earl of Clarendon, whose daughter Anne he married in September 1660. Both before and after marriage he had the reputation of being as great a libertine as his brother. But in 1668 or 1669 he was admitted to the Roman Catholic Church, though on his brother’s insistence he continued to take the Anglican sacraments until 1672, and he attended Anglican services until 1676. Charles II also insisted that James’s daughters, Mary and Anne, be raised in the Protestant faith.

James’s conversion had little effect on his political views, which were already formed by his reverence for his dead father and his close association with the High Church party. James, in fact, was always more favourable to the Anglican church than was his Protestant brother. He welcomed the prospect of England’s reentering the European war on the side of the Dutch; and he consented to the marriage of his elder daughter, Mary, to the Protestant William of Orange in 1677. For most of his life James was the spokesman of the conservative Anglican courtiers, who believed that his views on monarchy and Parliament coincided with theirs, who found his formal and humourless nature more congenial than Charles’s slippery geniality, and who respected his frank acknowledgment of his religious beliefs.

In view of the queen’s childlessness, however, the conversion of the heir presumptive to the throne roused great alarm in the general public. James resigned all of his offices in 1673 rather than take an anti-Catholic oath imposed by the so-called Test Act and thus made his position known publicly. Later that year, his first wife having died, he gave further offense by marrying a Roman Catholic princess, Mary of Modena. By 1678 James’s Roman Catholicism had created a climate of hysteria in which the fabricated tale of a Popish Plot to assassinate Charles and put his brother on the throne was generally believed. From 1679 to 1681 three successive Parliaments strove to exclude James from the succession by statute. During this crisis James spent long periods in exile at Brussels and Edinburgh. But owing largely to his own tenacious defense of his rights, the exclusionists were defeated. In 1682 he returned to England and resumed the leadership of the Anglican Tories, whose power in local government was reestablished and increased by the "remodeling" of the borough corporations and the government of the counties in their favour. By 1684 James’s influence on state policy was paramount, and when he finally came to the throne on February 6, 1685, with very little overt opposition or even criticism, it seemed likely that the strong support of the Anglicans would make him one of the most powerful of the 17th-century British kings.

The new royalist Parliament that assembled in May 1685 voted James a large income, and there seemed to be no reason why he should not in time secure adequate toleration for his coreligionists. But unsuccessful rebellions led by the duke of Monmouth in England and the duke of Argyll in Scotland, in the summer of 1685, marked a turning point in his attitude. James’s distrust of his subjects, conceived in the turbulent 1670s, was at once sharpened. The rebellions were put down with great ferocity, the army was considerably increased, and the new regiments were granted to Roman Catholic officers who had had military experience abroad and whose loyalty was undoubted. This last act of policy provoked a quarrel between king and Parliament, which was prorogued in November 1685, never to meet again. In 1686 the division between the king and his former allies, the Anglican Tories, deepened. After a number of them had been replaced, the judges of King’s Bench in the collusive action Godden v. Hales found in favour of the king’s power to excuse individuals from the Test Oath; Roman Catholics were admitted to the Privy Council and subsequently to the high offices of state. A commission for ecclesiastical causes was established to administer James’s powers as supreme governor of the Anglican church, and its first act was to suspend Henry Compton, bishop of London, one of the most outspoken critics of royal policy.

In 1687 James intensified his Roman Catholic policy and dismissed his Anglican brothers-in-law the earl of Clarendon and the earl of Rochester. Magdalen College, Oxford, was given over for the use of Roman Catholics, and a papal nuncio was officially accredited to St. James’s Palace. In April James issued the so-called Declaration of Indulgence, suspending the laws against Roman Catholics and Protestant dissenters alike; in July he dissolved Parliament, and in September he launched an intensive campaign to win over the Protestant dissenters and with their aid secure a new Parliament more amenable to his wishes.

What those wishes were is still not clear: some of his utterances suggest a genuine belief in religious toleration as a matter of principle; others point to the establishment of Roman Catholicism as the dominant if not the exclusive religion of the state. This confusion may well reflect the state of James’s own mind, which undoubtedly deteriorated in the years 1687–88, and some of his assertions, accusations, and threats at this time verge on the insane.

The unexpected news that the queen was pregnant (November 1687), establishing the prospect of a Roman Catholic succession, had great effect on most Protestants; while a wholesale "remodeling" of borough corporations, lord lieutenancies, deputy lieutenancies, and magistracies that winter inflamed the majority of the nobility and gentry, whose political and social power suffered by it. Ever since the spring of 1687 many English leaders had been in touch with William of Orange, the husband of the heiress presumptive Mary and the champion of Protestant Europe against Louis XIV of France. The spark was touched off by James himself, when he reissued his Declaration of Indulgence on April 27, 1688, and on May 4 ordered it to be read in the churches. The archbishop of Canterbury and six of his bishops petitioned James to withdraw the order. Their petition was subsequently published, and James made the mistake of prosecuting its authors for seditious libel. Meanwhile, on June 10, in slightly mysterious circumstances, the queen gave birth to a son.

On June 30 the seven bishops were acquitted-a tremendous defeat for the government-and that same day seven leading Englishmen sent a letter inviting William of Orange to lead an army to England and call a free Parliament to arbitrate on the legitimacy of the prince of Wales. By September William’s intentions were obvious, but James declined Louis XIV’s offer of assistance for fear of the reaction in England; in any case he was confident in the ability of his forces to repel invasion. William sailed under cover of the general war that had by then broken out in Europe, evaded the English fleet, and landed at Brixham on Tor Bay on November 5 (November 15, New Style), 1688. In the subsequent "campaign," James’s Protestant officers deserted to the enemy in such large numbers that he dared not commit the army to a pitched battle. This, together with the defection of his daughter Anne, finally shattered his nerve. He attempted to flee to France but was intercepted in Kent; 12 days later, on December 23, he was allowed to escape. On February 12, 1689, the Convention Parliament declared that James had abdicated and the next day offered the crown to William and Mary. The Scots Parliament followed suit in May.

In March 1689 James landed in Ireland, and a Parliament summoned to Dublin acknowledged him as king. But his Irish-French army was defeated by William at the Boyne (July 1 [July 11, New Style], 1690), and he returned to France. William’s generals reconquered Ireland the following year. In Ireland James had shown none of his former military ability, and he now aged rapidly, falling increasingly under the influence of his pietistic wife. He became daily more absorbed in his devotions, and his more aggressive supporters soon came to regard him as something of a liability. The Treaty of Rijswijk between England and France (1697) removed his last hopes of restoration.James Joseph Sylvester,  (born September 3, 1814, London, England-died March 15, 1897, London), British mathematician who, with Arthur Cayley, was a cofounder of invariant theory, the study of properties that are unchanged (invariant) under some transformation, such as rotating or translating the coordinate axes. He also made significant contributions to number theory and elliptic functions.

In 1837 Sylvester came second in the mathematical tripos at the University of Cambridge but, as a Jew, was prevented from taking his degree or securing an appointment there. In 1838 he became a professor of natural philosophy at University College, London (the only nonsectarian British university). In 1841 he accepted a professorship of mathematics at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, U.S., but resigned after only three months following an altercation with a student for which the school’s administration did not take his side. He returned to England in 1843. The following year he went to London, where he became an actuary for an insurance company, retaining his interest in mathematics only through tutoring (his students included Florence Nightingale). In 1846 he became a law student at the Inner Temple, and in 1850 he was admitted to the bar. While working as a lawyer, Sylvester began an enthusiastic and profitable collaboration with Cayley.

From 1855 to 1870 Sylvester was a professor of mathematics at the Royal Military Academy in Woolwich. He went to the United States once again in 1876 to become a professor of mathematics at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. While there he founded (1878) and became the first editor of the American Journal of Mathematics, introduced graduate work in mathematics into American universities, and greatly stimulated the American mathematical scene. In 1883 he returned to England to become the Savilian Professor of Geometry at the University of Oxford.

Sylvester was primarily an algebraist. He did brilliant work in the theory of numbers, particularly in partitions (the possible ways a number can be expressed as a sum of positive integers) and Diophantine analysis (a means for finding whole-number solutions to certain algebraic equations). He worked by inspiration, and frequently it is difficult to detect a proof in what he confidently asserted. His work is characterized by powerful imagination and inventiveness. He was proud of his mathematical vocabulary and coined many new terms, although few have survived. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1839, and he was the second president of the London Mathematical Society (1866–68). His mathematical output includes several hundred papers and one book, Treatise on Elliptic Functions (1876). He also wrote poetry, although not to critical acclaim, and published Laws of Verse (1870).Jean Duvergier de Hauranne, abbé de Saint-Cyran (born 1581, Bayonne, France-died  Oct. 11, 1643, Paris) French abbot of Saint-Cyran and a founder of the Jansenist movement. His opposition to Cardinal de Richelieu’s policies caused his imprisonment.

Duvergier studied theology at Leuven (Louvain), Belg., then settled in Paris after taking holy orders. His friendship with Cornelius Otto Jansen, a young champion of Augustinianism, led him to oppose the Leuven Jesuits who stood for Scholasticism. The two studied together from 1611 to 1616, after which Jansen returned to Leuven (1617), and Duvergier became confidential secretary to the bishop of Poitiers, where he met Cardinal de Richelieu. He was ordained priest in 1618 and was made sinecure abbot of Saint-Cyran (1620); thereafter, he was generally called Saint-Cyran.

As western Touraine was the headquarters of French Protestantism, Duvergier aimed his learning against the Huguenots. He dreamed of reforming Roman Catholicism on Augustinian lines. His zeal soon forced him out of Paris, where his attempt to gain the support of influential people led to his friendship with the Arnauld family, leading proponents of Jansenism. In 1637 he established a community that became known as the Solitaires (hermits) in the former convent at Port-Royal des Champs near Versailles.

Under the pseudonym of Petrus Aurelius, Duvergier attacked the Jesuits’ precarious utilitarianism and their defiance of episcopal authority. This work so annoyed Richelieu, whom he openly opposed, that Duvergier was imprisoned (May 14, 1638) in Vincennes until Richelieu’s death (1642).Jean Perréal,  (born c. 1460, Paris?, France-died June/July 1530, Paris/Lyon), painter, architect, and sculptor, the most important portrait painter in France at the beginning of the 16th century.

Perréal was a court painter to the Bourbons and later worked for Charles VIII, Louis XII, and Francis I of France. He traveled to Italy several times between 1492 and 1530 and in 1514 visited London, where he painted a portrait of the princess Mary Tudor. Perréal designed tombs, medals, and public ceremonials. A painting of Charles VIII of France and a miniature, Pierre Sala, are probably the most important works now attributed to him. Perréal was a superb craftsman who in his portraits grafted a French elegance of design and presentation onto conventional Flemish realism.Jean Theodore Delacour,  (born Sept. 26, 1890, Paris, Fr.-died  Nov. 5, 1985, Los Angeles, Calif., U.S.), French-American aviculturist known for discovering and rearing some of the world’s rarest birds.

As a boy, Delacour collected more than 1,300 live birds, which were destroyed, along with the area they inhabited, during World War I. He later made expeditions to Asia, Africa, and South America and assembled a second collection, more than twice as large as the first, at the Château de Clères in Normandy. In the 1920s he brought the first live specimens of Edwards’ pheasants to England. In 1924 he brought a pair of unidentified dark blue pheasants from northern Vietnam, named them imperial pheasants, and later succeeded in breeding them in captivity. Many other new species and subspecies of birds and mammals were discovered and named by him.

In 1920 he founded an avicultural magazine called L’Oiseau (subsequently merged with Revue Française). Later he wrote his Oiseaux de l’Indochine Française (1931; "The Birds of French Indochina"), which became a standard work on the birds of that region.

During World War II, when the Germans again destroyed his aviary, Delacour left France for the United States. He became a U.S. citizen in 1946 but returned to Clères to reestablish the aviary and zoo, which was later donated to the French nation. He was director of the Los Angeles County Museum from 1951 to 1960.Jennifer Connelly (born December 12, 1970, Catskill Mountains, New York, U.S.) American actress who won an Academy Award for her moving and complex portrayal of Alicia Nash, the wife of John Nash (played by Russell Crowe), a brilliant mathematician who won the 1994 Nobel Prize for Economics, in A Beautiful Mind (2001), a film that depicted Nash’s battle with paranoid schizophrenia.

Connelly spent most of her childhood in the Brooklyn Heights neighbourhood of New York City, and she began modeling at the age of 10, appearing in print advertisements and television commercials. Her first film appearance was in a small part in Sergio Leone’s gangster epic Once Upon a Time in America (1984). As a teen, Connelly had leading roles in several minor films, including Jim Henson’s children’s film Labyrinth (1986). After studying English at Yale University and drama at Stanford University, Connelly attracted notice with her performance in the Disney adventure film The Rocketeer (1991).

Connelly acted for several years in music videos and other minor films, the most notable of which was the noir crime drama Mulholland Falls (1996), before she garnered rave reviews for her evocation of drug addiction and degradation in Darren Aronofsky’s Requiem for a Dream (2000). She then appeared in the Jackson Pollock biopic Pollock (2000). Connelly earned a BAFTA Award and a Golden Globe Award as well as an Oscar for A Beautiful Mind. She went on to star with Ben Kingsley in House of Sand and Fog (2003) and with Leonardo DiCaprio in Blood Diamond (2006). Her other films included Reservation Road (2007) and The Day the Earth Stood Still (2008). Connelly portrayed the wife of Charles Darwin (played by her real-life husband, Paul Bettany) in Creation (2009) and the wife of the biblical figure Noah (Crowe) in Aronofsky’s epic Noah (2014).

In 2016 Connelly starred with Ewan McGregor in American Pastoral, an adaptation of the novel by Philip Roth. She then played the wife of a firefighter in Only the Brave (2017), which was inspired by the true events of the Granite Mountain Hotshots’ efforts to contain the Arizona wildfires during the summer of 2013. Her next film was the science-fiction thriller Alita: Battle Angel (2019), based on a manga novel. Connelly then starred in Snowpiercer (2020– ), which was her first TV series since The $treet (2000–01). She returned to the big screen in 2022, starring with Tom Cruise in Top Gun: Maverick (2022), a sequel to the 1986 blockbuster.Jimmie Johnson (born September 17, 1975, El Cajon, California, U.S.) American race-car driver who won seven National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing (NASCAR) championships and was the first driver to win the title in five consecutive years (2006–10).

Johnson, who started competing in motor sports at age five, won his first championship in motorcycle racing at eight years old. Eventually he turned to four-wheel vehicles and took up offroad racing, competing in leagues that included Short-Course Off-Road Drivers Association, SCORE International, and Mickey Thompson Entertainment Group. He won six championships and was named Rookie of the Year in each of those leagues before moving on to the American Speed Association, where he took Rookie of the Year honours in 1998. That same year, he began to race in NASCAR’s Busch Series and by 2000 was a member of Herzog Motorsports’ Busch team, finishing third in that season’s Rookie of the Year standings. When Herzog Motorsports lost its sponsor in 2000, Johnson was recommended to Hendrick Motorsports by NASCAR driver Jeff Gordon.

On October 7, 2001, Johnson finished 39th (out of 43 drivers) in his first appearance in NASCAR’s top series, the Winston Cup Series. (The series was subsequently renamed, in 2004, the Nextel Cup Series and, in 2008, the Sprint Cup Series.) He also earned his first Busch Series win in 2001, at Chicagoland Speedway, winding up eighth in that series’s point standings. In 2002 he began his rookie season in the Cup Series, winning three races and ending the season ranked fifth. Two of those victories came at Dover International Speedway in Delaware, making him the first rookie in series history to sweep both races at a track and the first to lead the point standings (for one week). He finished second in the standings in 2003, with three victories, and did the same in 2004, when he won a series-best eight times. He finished fifth overall in 2005 before starting his dominant run the following season.

In 2006, when he won his first Cup Series championship, Johnson registered five victories, including the Daytona 500, and had 13 top-5 and 24 top-10 finishes. In 2007 he earned his second title, becoming the first driver to have 10 victories in a season (including 4 in a row) since his teammate Gordon won 13 races in 1998. In 2008 Johnson won seven races and his third championship, matching fellow American Cale Yarborough, the first driver with three consecutive championships (1976–78). In 2009 Johnson again won seven races, on his way to his fourth title. He was the first to win four straight championships, and he became the first NASCAR driver to be named Male Athlete of the Year by the Associated Press. Johnson’s six victories in 2010 helped him secure a fifth championship.

Johnson’s championship streak ended in 2011, when he finished the Cup Series season in sixth place, which he followed with a third-place finish in 2012. In February 2013 he won his second career Daytona 500 title, and he finished that NASCAR season with his sixth career Cup Series championship. Johnson had his worst full NASCAR season in 2014, finishing the year with four race wins and in 11th place in the Cup Series. He was slightly better in 2015, with five wins and a 10th-place Cup Series finish. Johnson’s streak of middling seasons was brought to a sudden end in 2016 as he won a seventh career NASCAR title, which tied him with Richard Petty and Dale Earnhardt for the most championships for a driver in Cup Series history. The following year he won three NASCAR events, but those were the last of his career. After several winless seasons, Johnson retired from NASCAR in 2020. The following year he began competing in IndyCar races.Joel Osteen (born March 5, 1963, Houston, Texas, U.S.) American televangelist, theologian, speaker, and author who attracted millions of followers with his simple and positive sermons and his best-selling books.

Osteen’s parents founded the nondenominational charismatic Lakewood Church in Houston in 1959. His father, John Osteen, was pastor and over the years had built a regional following. In 1981 Osteen left Oral Roberts University after less than one year of study to help his father develop Lakewood’s growing national television ministry, working behind the cameras as a producer of the church’s broadcasts.

After his father’s death in 1999, Osteen took over as head pastor. Under his leadership, Lakewood soon became the largest and fastest-growing congregation in the U.S. He rapidly expanded the church’s media presence by purchasing advertisements on billboards and in other venues, doubling the church’s budget for television airtime, negotiating with different networks for optimal time slots, and targeting the largest media markets. Within a few years his weekly television broadcast reached households in more than 100 countries and became the top-rated inspirational program on the air. His 2004 book, Your Best Life Now: 7 Steps to Living at Your Full Potential, was a best seller.

In 2005 Osteen conducted a 15-city U.S. tour, preaching to large crowds at virtually every stop. That year Lakewood opened a new 16,000-seat megachurch in Houston’s Compaq Center, a former basketball and hockey arena. Weekly attendance at Lakewood rose from 6,000 in 1999 to more than 50,000 by 2016. In addition, by 2018 the televised services attracted an estimated 10 million viewers weekly. During this time he published a number of books, including How to Become a Better You: 7 Keys to Improving Your Life Every Day (2007), Think Better, Live Better: A Victorious Life Begins in Your Mind (2016), Blessed in the Darkness: How All Things Are Working for Your Good (2017), Empty Out the Negative: Make Room for More Joy, Greater Confidence, and New Levels of Influence (2020), and Peaceful on Purpose: The Power to Remain Calm, Strong, and Confident in Every Season (2021).

An affable youthful-looking man who earned the nickname "the smiling preacher," Osteen typically avoided dense or orthodox theology in his sermons. Instead, he delivered simple upbeat messages that emphasized his oft-repeated belief that "God wants us to have a better life." While this approach struck an obvious chord with the public, it also drew sharp criticism from those who viewed Osteen as little more than a motivational speaker offering a watered-down interpretation of Christianity. Others accused him of promoting a "prosperity gospel" designed to justify the accumulation of wealth. Osteen responded that he wanted to remain focused on the "goodness of God" and that he did not define prosperity in purely materialistic terms. He defended Lakewood’s unabashedly commercial approach to attracting new members, arguing that churches that opposed "changing with the times," as he put it, risked losing members or folding altogether.Johan Petter Falkberget,  (born September 30, 1879, near Røros, Norway-died April 5, 1967, Tyvol, near Røros), regional novelist of life in the east-central mountains of Norway.

The self-educated son of a miner, Falkberget himself worked in the copper mines from age 8 until he was 27, learning to write fiction at the same time. His novels about the mountain peasants, miners, and railway workers deal realistically with their hard lives, marginal culture, and antagonism to the more comfortable and prosperous valley settlers. One of his early works is Lisbet paa Jarnfjeld (1915; Lisbeth of Jarnfjeld), the psychological study of a mountain woman whose hard life leads to mental illness. His major works are set in the past. Den fjerde nattevakt (1923; The Fourth Night Watch) deals with life in Røros between 1807 and 1825. Christianus Sextus (1927–35), a trilogy set in the 18th century, dramatizes the history of a mine by that name. The novel’s action takes place after the Great Northern War (in which Russia, Denmark-Norway, and Saxony-Poland challenged Sweden’s supremacy), a postwar setting that forms a parallel to the post-World War I period in which the trilogy was written. According to one critic, the novel’s depiction of heroism and courage by the miners is matched by "the most moving portrait of a child in Norwegian literature."

In 1940 Falkberget escaped the German occupation of Norway by walking to Sweden, carrying with him the manuscript that was to become his second trilogy, Nattens brød (1940–59; "Bread of the Night"). The title is a reference to the ore for which local farmers give up their independence when they begin to transport it for the Danish rulers of Norway. This clash between local tradition and foreign capital informs the work’s realism but also its romanticism in the author’s depiction of heroic Norwegian values. It has been called "a novel with the power of a myth."John Garfield (born March 4, 1913, New York, New York, U.S.-died May 21, 1952, New York City) American film and stage actor who is best known for his intense portrayals of rebels and antiheroes.

Garfield grew up in the poor Jewish section of New York City’s Lower East Side. Street-gang involvement and numerous fistfights landed him in a reform school during his teen years, where he soon blossomed in forensic and athletic activities. A scholarship he won in a statewide New York Times-sponsored debating contest allowed him to attend the American Laboratory School, where he studied acting under Maria Ouspenskaya. His restless nature led him to live as a train-hopping vagrant during the early 1930s, but he returned to New York in 1932 and joined Eva Le Gallienne’s prestigious Civic Repertory Theatre. With that troupe, and under the name of Jules Garfield, he made his Broadway debut with a small part in the play Lost Boy (1933).

In 1934 Garfield joined the Group Theatre, the legendary and highly influential theatre company founded by Harold Clurman, Lee Strasberg, and Cheryl Crawford. Garfield attracted critical and public attention with his starring roles in the Group Theatre’s productions of three Clifford Odets plays, Waiting for Lefty (1935), Awake and Sing! (1935), and Golden Boy (1937). His success in these roles led to a contract with Warner Bros., for which Garfield appeared in his first film, the melodrama Four Daughters (1938). His brooding performance as a cynical young musician garnered considerable praise, as well as legions of female fans and an Oscar nomination for best supporting actor. Throughout the early 1940s, Garfield appeared in several successful films, including Saturday’s Children (1940), Castle on the Hudson (1940), The Sea Wolf (1941), and Tortilla Flat (1942). A mild heart attack kept the actor from military service during World War II; fully recovered, he entertained troops and appeared in several war-themed films, the best of which was Pride of the Marines (1945).

Garfield’s status as a cult hero was established with a series of classic films, most of them in the film noir genre, made during the late 1940s. In them, Garfield further refined his established screen persona of a common man led astray by temptation or a latent rebellious spirit. An ordinary-looking fellow, his masculinity and self-confidence projected considerable sensuality and made him a credible leading man. He learned to play the violin for his role as the gigolo-protégé of Joan Crawford in Humoresque (1946), his final film for Warner Bros. and, in the opinion of many critics, his best for the studio. The steamy The Postman Always Rings Twice (1946) paired Garfield with Lana Turner for a classic tale of revenge and deception. Garfield’s acting in a supporting role to Gregory Peck in Gentleman’s Agreement (1947)-a film controversial at the time for its frank treatment of anti-Semitism-is regarded as one of his finest performances. Also in 1947 Garfield made what remains one of his most popular films, as well as the film many critics regard as the greatest boxing melodrama of all time, Body and Soul (1947). In 1939 he had been passed over for the lead in the film version of Golden Boy in favour of screen newcomer William Holden, but Body and Soul provided him with a similar role in a better film and earned him an Oscar nomination for best actor.

Garfield’s final classic from this period was Force of Evil (1948), a seminal example of the film noir style, in which he portrayed a corrupt attorney. Because of its metaphoric condemnation of the American business community, Force of Evil was seen as subversive in some quarters and resulted in the blacklisting of its director, Abraham Polonsky. Garfield also became a target of red-baiters and was called before the House Committee on Un-American Activities in 1951 and labeled an uncooperative witness when he refused to name names. Garfield’s final film, He Ran All the Way (1951), was made for his own production company; it is likely that he would have had difficulty finding work in Hollywood thereafter. Despite a history of heart problems, many close to Garfield attributed his death from coronary thrombosis at age 39 to the stress of his House Committee ordeal.John Knox (born c. 1514, near Haddington, East Lothian, Scotland-died November 24, 1572, Edinburgh) foremost leader of the Scottish Reformation, who set the austere moral tone of the Church of Scotland and shaped the democratic form of government it adopted. He was influenced by George Wishart, who was burned for heresy in 1546, and the following year Knox became the spokesman for the Reformation in Scotland. After a period of intermittent imprisonment and exile in England and on the European continent, in 1559 he returned to Scotland, where he supervised the preparation of the constitution and liturgy of the Reformed Church. His most important literary work was his History of the Reformation in Scotland.

Almost nothing is known of Knox’s life before 1540, the accounts given by his earlier biographers being mostly fanciful. Of his parentage it is known only that his mother’s name was Sinclair (Knox used the name John Sinclair as an incognito in times of danger), that his father’s name was William, and that he and both Knox’s grandfathers had fought, and two of them had died-perhaps at the Battle of Flodden against Henry VIII’s troops. The family may have been farmers.

It is supposed that Knox trained for the priesthood under the scholar John Major, most probably at the University of St. Andrews. Knox did not take a master’s degree, however, but he ended his training with a mind imbued with that delight in abstract thought and dialectical disputation which, even in that age, was recognized throughout Europe as typical of Scottish scholarship. He was in priest’s orders by 1540, and  in 1543 he was known to be also practicing as an apostolic notary in the Haddington area, which would seem to indicate that he was in good standing with the ecclesiastical authorities.

Two years later, however, Knox was in more equivocal company as tutor to the sons of two gentlemen of East Lothian who were deeply involved in the intrigues of political Protestantism. Under their protection, George Wishart, a Scottish Reformation leader who was to become an early martyr for the cause, began a preaching tour in the Lothians in December 1545. Knox was much in his company, and Knox’s complete conversion to the Reformed faith dates from his contact with Wishart, whose memory he cherished ever afterward. Wishart was burned for heresy in March 1546 by Cardinal David Beaton, archbishop of St. Andrews, who, rather than the weak governor, was the real ruler of Scotland. Wishart’s execution began a chain of events that profoundly altered Knox’s life. Three months later, Beaton was murdered by Protestant conspirators who fortified themselves in St. Andrews castle.

Meantime, Knox, accompanied by his pupils, was moving from place to place to escape persecution and arrest. His desire was to go to Germany to study there at the Protestant seats of learning, but his employers sent word to him to take their sons to St. Andrews and continue their education under the protection of the castle. Thus, in April 1547, less than a year after the cardinal’s murder and against his own desire, Knox arrived with his pupils in St. Andrews-still an unknown man. The three months that he spent there transformed him, against his own predisposition, into the acknowledged spokesman and protagonist of the Reformation movement in Scotland. The Protestants in the castle had become involved in controversy with the university; several of them, becoming aware that a man of uncommon gifts had joined them, pressed upon Knox’s conscience the duty of taking up "the public office and charge of preaching." Knox’s inclination was for the quiet of the study and the schoolroom, not for the responsibilities and perils of the life of a preacher of a proscribed and persecuted faith. He resisted the call with tears, and only after great hesitation was he persuaded to preach in the town of St. Andrews a sermon that convinced friend and foe alike that the great spokesman of Scottish Protestantism had been found. This was the turning point of Knox’s life; from this time forward he regarded himself as called to preaching by God, and he was the more certain of the divine origin and compulsion of the call in that it ran counter to every inclination of his own.

At the end of June 1547, French assistance reached the governor of Scotland. The garrison of St. Andrews castle, bombarded from without and assailed by plague within, capitulated on terms that were not kept; Knox and others were carried off to slavery in the French galleys. English intervention secured his release 19 months later, though with permanently broken health.

In England the Protestant government of Edward VI was endeavouring to hurry clergy and people into the Reformation faster, if anything, than most of them were willing to go. For this program preachers and propagandists were urgently required; and because a return to a Scotland under Roman Catholic rule was impossible for Knox at this time, the English government promptly made him one of a select corps of licensed preachers and sent him north to propagate the Reformation in the turbulent garrison town of Berwick-upon-Tweed. He brought order to the town and established a congregation on Puritan lines, and there he met Marjorie Bowes, who was to become his wife. Early in 1551 he was given a new assignment in Newcastle and a little later was appointed to be one of the six royal chaplains whose duties included periodic residence at, and preaching before, the court as well as itinerant evangelism in areas where the regular clergy were lacking in Protestant zeal. He later refused to accept the bishopric of Rochester and the vicarage of Allhallows, London, but continued, under the patronage of the government, to exercise an itinerant ministry, mainly, but not exclusively, in Buckinghamshire, Kent, and London.

In three respects Knox left his mark on the Church of England: he took part in the shaping of its articles; he secured the insertion into The Book of Common Prayer of the so-called black rubric, which denies the corporal presence of Christ in the consecrated bread and wine used in Holy Communion and explains that kneeling at communion implies no adoration of the elements; and he was one of the chief foster fathers of English Puritanism, a reform movement started within the state church with a view to the more rigorous application of Reformation principles in doctrine and worship.John Lubbock, 1st Baron Avebury,  (born April 30, 1834, London-died  May 28, 1913, Kingsgate Castle, Kent, Eng.), banker, influential Liberal-Unionist politician, and naturalist who successfully promoted about a dozen measures of some importance in Parliament but was perhaps best known for his books on archaeology and entomology.

He became a partner in his father’s bank at 22, succeeded him to the baronetcy in 1865, and served on commissions relating to coinage and other financial questions. In Pre-historic Times (1865), long used as a textbook of archaeology, and in The Origin of Civilization and the Primitive Condition of Man, he coined the terms Paleolithic (Old Stone Age) and Neolithic (New Stone Age).

Lubbock was elected to Parliament for Maidstone, Kent (1870 and 1874), and served as vice chancellor of the University of London (1872–80). During that period he secured passage of the Bank Holidays Act (1871) and wrote The Origin and Metamorphoses of Insects (1873) and British Wild Flowers (1875). Elected to Parliament for the University of London (1880–1900), he influenced passage of the Bills of Exchange and Ancient Monuments Protection acts (1882) and the Shop Hours Act (1889). He also wrote Ants, Bees, and Wasps (1882) and On the Senses, Instincts, and Intelligence of Animals (1888), which established him as a pioneer in the field of animal behaviour.John VI (born May 13, 1767, Lisbon, Portugal-died March 10, 1826, Lisbon) prince regent of Portugal from 1799 to 1816 and king from 1816 to 1826, whose reign saw the revolutionary struggle in France, the Napoleonic invasion of Portugal (during which he established his court in Brazil), and the implantation of representative government in both Portugal and Brazil.

John was the younger son of Queen Maria I, becoming heir on the death of his elder brother and taking power in 1792 as a result of the mental illness of his mother. In 1799 her illness was declared incurable, and he assumed the title of prince regent, which he used until her death in March 1816. John married Carlota Joaquina, eldest daughter of Charles IV of Spain, and supported Spain against the French Republic. But Spain made peace at Basel in 1795 and served as a vehicle for French pressure on Portugal. In 1801 Spain finally invaded Portugal, though peace was made at Badajoz. In 1807, after his victories in central Europe, Napoleon proclaimed his European blockade, threatening to close the port of Lisbon. As French troops crossed Spain and approached Lisbon, the royal family retired to Brazil with the government (November 1807). Britain guaranteed the throne of the Braganças and in 1808 sent an army to Portugal under Arthur Wellesley (later duke of Wellington), which forced the surrender of the French. John gave full military support to Wellesley, and two French invasions were repelled. After Napoleon’s surrender in 1814, John was expected to return; but, on Napoleon’s escape from Elba, John returned to Brazil, which he made a united kingdom with Portugal. On March 20, 1816, his mother died, and he became king.

His annexation of Montevideo led to a conflict with Spain, and his stay in Brazil made the Portuguese impatient for reform. In 1820 the radical revolution in Spain spread to Portugal, and he finally agreed to leave Brazil and to sanction a liberal constitution, leaving his heir Peter (Pedro) in Rio de Janeiro. He accepted radical reform limiting his powers, but the liberals precipitated the separation of Brazil, of which his son was declared emperor. When the French intervened to suppress radicalism in Spain (1823), the Portuguese radicals were discredited and overthrown. John VI was restored to his authority but promised a constitution. The absolutists supported his queen, Carlota Joaquina, and made their son Michael (Miguel) commander-in-chief. John attempted to steer a middle course, separating from his wife and sending Michael into exile.

John then negotiated with Peter in Brazil, using the services of a British diplomat, Sir Charles Stuart. He reluctantly accepted the political separation of Brazil in 1825, dying soon after. He supported his favourite daughter, Maria Isabel, as regent, pending the decision of Peter, who attempted to resolve the dynastic and political problem by abdicating the crown of Portugal in favour of his daughter, Maria II, and bestowing his own constitution on Portugal.…the emirates prompted travel writer Jonathan Raban to note of the capital: "The condition of Abu Dhabi was so evidently mint that it would not have been surprising to see adhering to the buildings bits of straw and polystyrene from the crates in which they had been packed."José Sarney, a cofounder of the PFL, was selected as Neves’s vice presidential candidate. The Neves-Sarney ticket won the balloting, but when Neves fell ill and died before taking office, Sarney became president; he served in the post until 1990. In 1987 the PFL withdrew…Joseph Kasavubu,  (born 1910?, Tshela, Belgian Congo [now Democratic Republic of the Congo]-died  March 24, 1969, Boma), statesman and first president of the independent Congo republic from 1960 to 1965, who shortly after independence in 1960 ousted the Congo’s first premier, Patrice Lumumba, after the breakdown of order in the country.

Educated by Roman Catholic missionaries, Kasavubu became a lay teacher. In 1942 he entered the civil service; he attained the rank of chief clerk, the highest position open to Congolese in the Belgian colonial administration.

An early leader in the Congo’s independence movement, Kasavubu during the late 1940s held important offices in Congolese cultural societies and alumni associations that were actually political organizations operating in defiance of Belgian authorities. As a member of the powerful Bakongo (or Kongo), one of the largest ethnic groups in the country, Kasavubu in the 1950s sought an independent Congo with a federal structure that would ensure a certain measure of Bakongo autonomy.

Kasavubu became president (1955) of Abako (Alliance des Ba-Kongo), the powerful cultural-political association of the Bakongo. In 1957 Abako candidates swept the first municipal elections permitted by Belgian authorities in Léopoldville (now Kinshasa), and Kasavubu was elected mayor of the Dendale district.

In the Congo’s first national elections in 1960, Lumumba’s party outpolled Kasavubu’s Abako and its allies, but neither side could form a parliamentary coalition. As a compromise measure, Kasavubu and Lumumba formed an uneasy partnership with the former as president and the latter as premier.

Shortly after independence, Congo was racked by an army mutiny, Belgian military intervention to protect the remaining Belgian residents, and the secession of the province of Katanga under Moise Tshombe. United Nations aid proved ineffective in restoring order in the country, and there were reports that Premier Lumumba had accepted offers of Soviet military aid to prop up the faltering central government. With the backing of the army under Colonel Joseph Mobutu (later Mobutu Sese Seko), Kasavubu dismissed Lumumba and appointed a new government. Kasavubu then tacitly supported Mobuto’s first coup in late 1960 and later engineered the accession of Tshombe to the premiership in 1964. Kasavubu’s role in Congolese politics effectively ended, however, with Mobutu’s second, and final overthrow of the government in 1965. Kasavubu then retired to his farm at Boma on the lower Congo River.Joseph Kimhi,  (born c. 1105, Spain-died c. 1170, Narbonne?, Fr.), European grammarian, biblical exegete, and poet who, with his sons, Moses and David, made fundamental contributions to establishing Hebrew-language studies.

Through his many translations into Hebrew of works written in Arabic by Spanish Jews, Kimhi came to play a principal part in introducing Hebraic studies to the rest of Europe. His acquaintance with Latin grammar led him to divide the previously acknowledged seven Hebrew vowels into five long and five short vowels. His comprehensive grammatical text, Sefer ha-zikkaron ("Book of Remembrance"), introduced a classification of verb stems for Hebrew that remains in use. Another work, Sefer ha-galui ("Book of the Demonstration"), dealing with lexicography and questions of exegesis, served as a vehicle for criticizing the work of Jacob ben Meir Tam, the leading Talmudic scholar of the time. Among his critical commentaries on various books of the Old Testament, those on Proverbs and Job were published. Those that became lost are known, however, to have had important exegetic worth. Kimhi’s work on Jewish apologetics, Sefer ha-Berit ("Book of the Covenant"), is important for its historical information on the position of the Jews in Provence. He also established himself as a poet of considerable merit and was frequently quoted by later generations. His Shekel hakodesh ("The Holy Shekel") was published with an English translation in 1919.Juan Antonio Samaranch, marquis de Samaranch,  (born July 17, 1920, Barcelona, Spain-died April 21, 2010, Barcelona), Spanish businessman and public official who served from 1980 to 2001 as the seventh president of the International Olympic Committee (IOC).

Samaranch was the son of a wealthy textile manufacturer. He was educated at Barcelona’s Higher Institute of Business Studies, and after the Spanish Civil War (1936–39) he joined the family business and later worked in real estate development and banking. He competed in boxing and roller hockey from an early age, helping to initiate an international roller hockey championship in Barcelona in 1951. He joined the Spanish Olympic Committee in 1954, the same year that he was elected to the Barcelona city council. In 1973 he became president of the Catalan regional council, and he served as Spain’s ambassador to the Soviet Union in 1977–80. Elected to the IOC in 1966, he served as head of protocol (1968–75, 1979–80), member of the Executive Board (1970–2001), and vice president (1974–78) and was elected president in 1980. In 1992 he was made marqués de Samaranch by King Juan Carlos.

Advancing the policies of his IOC predecessor, Lord Killanin of Ireland, Samaranch aggressively diversified the IOC’s revenue sources from television contracts to brand-licensing schemes. He also welcomed professional athletes to Olympic sports such as tennis and basketball, arguing that Soviet-bloc countries had been sending professional athletes to the Olympic Games for years and that some nonprofessional athletes in the United States and elsewhere had already earned huge sums for commercial endorsements. An accomplished politician, he mended bridges between Soviet- and NATO-bloc countries following boycotts of the Moscow (1980) and Los Angeles (1984) Olympic Games, worked out a compromise that permitted both China and Taiwan to enter teams, allowed participation by a post-Soviet team in 1992, and opened the Olympic Museum in Lausanne, Switzerland, in 1993.

In the eyes of his critics, Samaranch was arrogant and autocratic. He faced perhaps his greatest challenge when, in December 1998, allegations surfaced of widespread corruption among IOC members, who had accepted bribes in the bidding process by potential host cities. Several committee members were expelled, others resigned, and there were calls for Samaranch to resign. Samaranch succeeded in passing a 50-point reform package that addressed the conduct of the bidding process and attempted to eliminate gifts to IOC members. The thorny issue of drug use by athletes, especially the regulation of performance-enhancing drugs, was also addressed. In the summer of 2001 Samaranch was replaced as IOC president by Belgian Jacques Rogge but was elected honorary president for life.Julian Fellowes (born August 17, 1949, Cairo, Egypt) British actor, producer, novelist, and screenwriter best known for creating the television series Downton Abbey (2010–15).

Fellowes was born in Egypt, where his father was with the British embassy. While attending Magdalene College, Cambridge, he joined the Footlights comedy group. He then studied at the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art in London. Beginning in the mid-1970s, he played character roles in scores of television series and movies; he later had a recurring role on BBC TV’s Monarch of the Glen (2000–05). He struggled to avoid typecasting, however, and in the 1990s he began to write TV adaptations of novels, notably Little Sir Nicholas (1990), Little Lord Fauntleroy (1995), and The Prince and the Pauper (1996).

Fellowes’s breakthrough came with his first produced screenplay, Gosford Park (2001). It earned him several honours, including an Academy Award for best original screenplay. He later wrote scripts for Vanity Fair (2004); Separate Lies (2005), which he also directed; The Young Victoria (2009); The Tourist (2010); Romeo and Juliet (2013); and The Chaperone (2018). He also published the novels Snobs (2004) and Past Imperfect (2008) and publicly acknowledged that he had written "bodice-ripping" romance novels under pseudonyms, notably Rebecca Greville and Alexander Merrant. His interactive narrative Belgravia (2016) is a serialized novel initially released as a mobile-phone or tablet app containing both text and audiobook versions of the story. Set in 1840s London, the plot hinges on the British class conflicts of the period.

In 2010 Fellowes created and produced Downton Abbey, which began following the fortunes of more than a dozen major characters, from the earl and countess of Grantham down to the scullery maid, in the pre-World War I period. Although the costume drama, which debuted on Britain’s ITV television, was dismissed by some as well-dressed soap opera, the calibre of writing and acting captured the public imagination and numerous awards. In 2011 the show received an Emmy for best drama series, and Fellowes received an Emmy for his writing. Downton Abbey ended in 2015, but he later penned the screenplays for two feature films (2019 and 2022) that follow the characters in the ensuing years.

Fellowes continued to work on other projects. In 2012 he penned the script for the TV miniseries Titanic. He also wrote the book for the stage musical School of Rock (2015), which was adapted from Richard Linklater’s film of the same name, and wrote and produced a 2016 television adaptation of the Anthony Trollope novel Doctor Thorne (1858). In 2020 Fellowes returned to TV with the limited series Belgravia, which he adapted from his serialized novel of the same name. Two years later The Gilded Age debuted on HBO. The TV show, which was set in the late 19th century and centred on New York high society, was cocreated and cowritten by Fellowes.

He was granted a Tory life peerage in 2011.…who was the sister of Kamsa, the wicked king of Mathura (in modern Uttar Pradesh). Kamsa, hearing a prophecy that he would be destroyed by Devaki’s child, tried to slay her children, but Krishna was smuggled across the Yamuna River to Gokula (or Vraja, modern Gokul), where he was raised…
Karl, baron von Rokitansky,  (born Feb. 19, 1804, Königgrätz, Austria-died July 23, 1878, Vienna), Austrian pathologist whose endeavours to establish a systematic picture of the sick organism from nearly 100,000 autopsies-30,000 of which he himself performed-helped make the study of pathological anatomy a cornerstone of modern medical practice and established the New Vienna School as a world medical centre during the latter half of the 19th century.

A professor of pathological anatomy (1844–74) at the Vienna General Hospital, he inspired the Bohemian student Ignaz Semmelweis, later a martyr to the cause of antiseptic medical practice, to take up the study of medicine (1846) and afterward supported him in his struggle to eliminate childbed fever by cleaning up Europe’s maternity wards.

First to detect bacteria in lesions of malignant endocarditis, an often rapidly fatal inflammation of the membrane lining the inner walls of the heart, Rokitansky created the basis for a differentiation of lobar pneumonia (originating in the lower lobe of the lung) and lobular pneumonia, or bronchopneumonia (originating in the finer subdivisions of the branched bronchial tree). He made a fundamental study of acute yellow atrophy of the liver (now known as Rokitansky’s disease; 1843), established the micropathology of pulmonary emphysema (a condition of the lung characterized by enlarged air spaces separated from the terminals of the bronchial tree), and first described spondylolisthesis (1839), the forward displacement of one vertebra over another.

His Handbuch der pathologischen Anatomie, 3 vol. (1842–46; Treatise of Pathological Anatomy, 1849–52), represented an elevation of the discipline to the status of an established science.Karl Jaspers,  (born Feb. 23, 1883, Oldenburg, Ger.-died  Feb. 26, 1969, Basel, Switz.), German philosopher, one of the most important Existentialists in Germany, who approached the subject from man’s direct concern with his own existence. In his later work, as a reaction to the disruptions of Nazi rule in Germany and World War II, he searched for a new unity of thinking that he called world philosophy.

Jaspers was the oldest of the three children of Karl Wilhelm Jaspers and Henriette Tantzen. His ancestors on both sides were peasants, merchants, and pastors who had lived in northern Germany for generations. His father, a lawyer, was a high constable of the district and eventually a director of a bank.

Jaspers was delicate and sickly in his childhood. As a consequence of his numerous childhood diseases, he developed bronchiectasis (a chronic dilation of the bronchial tubes) during his adolescent years, and this condition led to cardiac decompensation (the inability of the heart to maintain adequate circulation). These ailments were a severe handicap throughout his adult life.

Jaspers entered the University of Heidelberg in 1901, enrolling in the faculty of law; in the following year he moved to Munich, where he continued his studies of law, but without much enthusiasm. He spent the next six years studying medicine at the Universities of Berlin, Göttingen, and Heidelberg. After he completed his state examination to practice medicine in 1908, he wrote his dissertation Heimweh und Verbrechen ("Nostalgia and Crime"). In February 1909 he was registered as a doctor. He had already become acquainted with his future wife, Gertrud Mayer, during his student years, and he married her in 1910.

In 1909 Jaspers became a volunteer research assistant at the University of Heidelberg psychiatric clinic, a position he held until 1915. The clinic was headed by the renowned neuropathologist Franz Nissl, who had assembled under him an excellent team of assistants. Because of his desire to learn psychiatry in his own way without being regimented into any particular pattern of thought by his teachers, Jaspers elected to work in his own time, at his own pace, and with patients in whom he was particularly interested. This was granted to him only because he agreed to work without a salary.

When Jaspers started his research work, clinical psychiatry was considered to be empirically based but lacking any underlying systematic framework of knowledge. It dealt with different aspects of the human organism as they might affect the behaviour of human beings suffering from mental illness. These aspects ranged from anatomical, physiological, and genetic to neurological, psychological, and sociological influences. A study of these aspects opened the way to an understanding and explanation of human behaviour. Diagnosis was of paramount importance; therapy was largely neglected. Aware of this situation, Jaspers realized the conditions that were required in order to establish psychopathology as a science: a language had to be found that, on the basis of previously conducted research, was capable of describing the symptoms of disease well enough to facilitate positive recognition in other cases; and various methods appropriate to the different spheres of psychiatry had to be worked out.

Jaspers tried to bring the methods of Phenomenology-the direct investigation and description of phenomena as consciously experienced, without theories about their causal explanation-into the field of clinical psychiatry. These efforts soon bore fruit, and his reputation as a researcher in the forefront of new developments in psychiatry was established. In 1911, when he was only 28 years old, he was requested by Ferdinand Springer, a well-known publisher, to write a textbook on psychopathology; he completed the Allgemeine Psychopathologie (General Psychopathology, 1965) two years later. The work was distinguished by its critical approach to the various methods available for the study of psychiatry and by its attempt to synthesize these methods into a cohesive whole.Karl von Goebel,  (born March 8, 1855, Billigheim, Baden [Germany]-died October 9, 1932, Munich, Germany), German botanist whose Organographie der Pflanzen (1898–1901; Organography of Plants, 1900–05) clarified the principles of the science of plant morphology in relation to form and structure.

After receiving a Ph.D. in 1877, Goebel held a number of teaching positions and participated in numerous scientific expeditions to the South American Andes, the U.S. Rockies, the Indian Ghats, the Middle East, and the New Zealand Alps. In his studies, Goebel emphasized function as the determinant of form, and, thus, according to him, all structural characters are, or have been, adapted to their function, with a change in function producing a change in form. His ideas on form and function, fully expanded in his major work, Organographie, were an effective transition between the strictly observational and experimental approaches to botany.…by a relief force under Kerbogha of Mosul. The situation seemed so hopeless that some Crusaders deserted and attempted to return home. Among these was Peter the Hermit, who was caught and returned to the host, where he was quietly forgiven. Another deserter was the French knight Stephen of Blois,…Khosrow I (died ad 579) Persian king who ruled the Sāsānian empire from 531 to 579 and was remembered as a great reformer and patron of the arts and scholarship.

Little is known of the early life of Khosrow beyond legends. One story says that when Khosrow’s father, King Kavadh, took refuge with the Hephthalites, eastern neighbours of Iran, on the way (near the town of Nishapur) he married a peasant’s daughter, who gave birth to Khosrow. At his father’s death Khosrow did not at first succeed him, but in a struggle for the throne he was successful and put to death his brothers. At the end of his father’s reign, great social disorders had occurred because of a religious revolution of a sect called the Mazdakites. Khosrow first restored order and then launched reforms to transform the declining Sāsānian empire.

The reform of taxation was the most important of his actions, and it was probably copied from the Roman system inaugurated by the emperor Diocletian. Previously in the Sāsānian empire taxes had been levied on the yield of land; Khosrow established a fixed sum rather than a yearly variation. Other taxes were introduced that brought stability to the income of the state and were also fairer to those who paid the taxes. Khosrow’s program of taxes lasted into Islāmic times.

Khosrow also reorganized the Sāsānian bureaucracy, and the system of ministries, or divans, under a prime minister is said to have been initiated by him. He was fortunate during most of his reign in having a capable prime minister called Bozorgmehr, who became famous in story and legend for his wisdom and abilities.

Under Khosrow the process of decentralization of the power of the monarch was reversed, and the lower aristocracy, or knights, called dihqāns, grew in importance at the expense of the great feudal lords, who had been more powerful under Khosrow’s predecessors. It is difficult to know how many changes really can be attributed to Khosrow’s reign and how many are arbitrarily assigned to him because of his place in history. Whether the religiously sanctioned division of society into priests, warriors, bureaucracy, and common folk was codified under his reign, as claimed by some sources, is difficult to determine.

Khosrow also reorganized the army and appointed four chief commanders to guard the four frontiers of Iran. On the frontier against the Byzantines and their Arab allies in the Syrian Desert, against the peoples of the steppes of southern Russia at the town of Derbent between the Caucasus Mountains and the Caspian Sea, and to the east of the sea in the present Turkmen steppes, Khosrow built defensive walls. The army, however, did not remain on the defensive, for Khosrow’s reign is noted for his wars against the Byzantines. In 540 Antioch was conquered and held for a short time by Khosrow. He brought many prisoners from Antioch and settled them in a new town near his capital of Ctesiphon, modeled on old Antioch. In the east, Khosrow, in alliance with the Turks, a new power in Central Asia, crushed the Hephthalites, and he established a hegemony over many of their principalities. The Sāsānian frontier in the east reached the Amu Darya (Oxus River) during his reign.

He also fought extensively in Armenia and Lazica in the Caucasus. Furthermore, under his reign a Sāsānian army conquered Yemen. Khosrow relied on a professional army more than his predecessors, who had summoned feudal levies when they set out to war.

Khosrow was also a great patron of culture, and in 529, when the ancient academy of Athens was closed, a number of Greek philosophers migrated to the Sāsānian empire, where they were well received by the ruler. The later famous medical school of Gondēshāpūr was probably started in Khosrow’s reign, and the famous physician Burzoe is supposed to have been sent to India by Khosrow to gather Sanskrit books of learning to be translated into the Middle Persian language. The game of chess reportedly was also brought by him from India. Astronomy and astrology flourished at the court of Khosrow, and one star table (called the zīj-i Shahriyār), which was the basis of many later Islāmic tables, is said to have originated during the reign of Khosrow. Several works of Middle Persian, such as the Book of Deeds of Ardashir (Kārnāmak), are attributed to this period. Likewise, some scholars claim that the codification of the Avesta, the sacred book of the Zoroastrian religion, as well as the creation of a special Avestan alphabet to record the text, took place at the order of Khosrow. Further, it is supposed that the stories and legends of ancient Iran were gathered into a Khwatāy-nāmak ("Book of Kings") in the time of Khosrow and thus provided the source for Ferdowsī’s immortal epic much later. Some of the names found in Ferdowsī’s Shāh-nāmeh appear among the royal family of Khosrow, which indicates at the least an interest on the part of the monarch in ancient legends.

Perhaps more than fact, the stories told about Khosrow have made his name famous in history. Almost any pre-Islāmic structure in Iran whose origin is unknown will be attributed to Khosrow by the simple folk. Undoubtedly he built many bridges, roads, and palaces, but much more is assigned to him in legend. The famous palace with the huge arch, called Ṭāq Kisrā, in Ctesiphon, near modern Baghdad, is said to date from Khosrow I, but this is uncertain. Several collections of wise sayings of this monarch, as well as stories about him, have been preserved in Arabic or New Persian versions. In them his reputation for justice as well as wisdom is constantly cited. The splendour of the court and the glory of his reign provided models for the later ʿAbbāsid court in Baghdad, and many of the institutions established by Khosrow were maintained in Islāmic times, when Khosrow was hailed as the model pre-Islāmic ruler to be emulated by Muslim princes.…and central Asia, written by Kirakos Gandzaketsi, a member of his suite, gives one of the earliest and most comprehensive accounts of Mongolian geography and ethnology.Konstantin von Tischendorf (born January 18, 1815, Lengenfeld, Saxon Vogtland [now Saxony, Germany]-died  December 7, 1874, Leipzig) German biblical critic who made extensive and invaluable contributions to biblical textual criticism, famous for his discovery of the Codex Sinaiticus, a celebrated manuscript of the Bible.

While a student at the University of Leipzig, Tischendorf began his work on the recensions of the New Testament text, a task that he was to pursue for the rest of his life. In 1844 he went to the Middle East. While working in the library of the Monastery of St. Catherine in the Sinai Peninsula, he discovered, among some old parchments, leaves of what he was certain were among the oldest biblical manuscripts that he had ever seen. He was permitted to take 43 of these leaves back with him to Leipzig, and in 1846 he published a facsimile edition, taking care to keep secret the place where he had obtained them. In 1853 he made a second journey to Sinai with the hope of recovering the other leaves he had seen on his first trip, but he found no trace of them. He made still a third trip, with the support of the Russian government, in 1859. Just as he was about to give up all hope of finding the manuscripts, the steward of the monastery showed Tischendorf the manuscripts that he was looking for and others besides. After intricate negotiations, and for a sum that has been estimated at about $7,000, Tischendorf procured for the tsar Alexander II what is now known as the Codex Sinaiticus. In 1933 the codex was purchased from the Soviet government by the British Museum for £100,000 (about $500,000). These manuscripts date probably from the latter half of the 4th century, were probably written in Egypt, and include most of the Old Testament and the entire New Testament, as well as the Letter of Barnabas and part of the Shepherd of Hermas.

In numerous writings, Tischendorf presented the results of his work. His eighth edition of the Greek New Testament is considered to be of most value to contemporary textual critics.Kóstas Kariotákis (born 1896, Trípolis, Greece-died  July 20, 1928, Préveza) Greek poet influenced by the 19th-century French Symbolist poets.

Kariotákis spent much of his lonely childhood in Crete. He read law at Athens and won a prize for poetry in 1920. After obtaining his degree he worked as a government clerk in Athens, where he developed a friendship with the young poet Maria Polidoúri. Later he was transferred to Pátrai and thence to Préveza, where he shot himself.

Kariotákis’ three volumes of poetry show the influence of the New School of Poetry of Athens, founded in about 1880 by Kostís Palamás, which revolted against Katharevusa, the stilted and archaic official language of Greece, and against the emotionalism of the Romantics. His poetry also reveals the Symbolist influence in addition to the loneliness and despair of his childhood.Kristin Hunter Lattany (born September 12, 1931, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S.-died November 14, 2008, Magnolia, New Jersey) was an American novelist who examined black life and race relations in the United States in both children’s stories and works for adults.

Lattany began writing for The Pittsburgh Courier, an important African American newspaper, when she was 14 and continued until the year after she graduated from the University of Pennsylvania in 1951 with a bachelor’s degree in elementary education. She married writer Joseph Hunter in 1952 (divorced 1962). After briefly working as a teacher, she became an advertising copywriter. During that time, she won a national television contest in 1955 with her script Minority of One, about school integration; fearing controversy, the network rewrote the story to show a French-speaking immigrant entering an all-white school.

In her first and best-known novel, God Bless the Child (1964), three generations of women confront choices forced upon them by their skin tones. Despite harshly realistic settings, her subsequent fiction tended toward optimism. The Landlord (1966; film 1970) presents a misanthropic white landlord transformed by his new black tenants. After her second marriage in 1968, she published variously as Kristin Hunter, Kristin Hunter Lattany, and Kristin Lattany. In The Survivors (1975), a lonely, prosperous, middle-aged dressmaker befriends a neglected 13-year-old boy despite his involvement with dishonest and sometimes brutal acquaintances. The comical Kinfolks (1996) concerns the revelation that the engaged children of two lifelong friends were produced by unions with the same man. Do Unto Others (2000) investigates the cultural differences between African Americans and recent African immigrants through the story of a hair salon owner who shelters a young Nigerian woman. Lattany delved into campus race relations in Breaking Away (2003), which centres on a black professor who is drawn into a harassment lawsuit initiated by a group of students.

Her first book for young readers, The Soul Brothers and Sister Lou (1968), is about a musical group inspired by the youths who sang together nightly in the alley below her apartment. Its sequel was Lou in the Limelight (1981). Lattany also wrote the young adult collections Boss Cat (1971) and Guests in the Promised Land (1973).

Lattany taught in the English department at the University of Pennsylvania from 1972 to 1995.L. S. Vygotsky (born Nov. 5, 1896, Orsha, Russia-died June 11, 1934, Moscow) Soviet psychologist. He studied linguistics and philosophy at the University of Moscow before becoming involved in psychological research. While working at Moscow’s Institute of Psychology (1924–34), he became a major figure in post-revolutionary Soviet psychology. He studied the role of social and cultural factors in the making of human consciousness; his theory of signs and their relationship to the development of speech influenced psychologists such as A.R. Luria and Jean Piaget. His best-known work, Thought and Language (1934), was briefly suppressed as a threat to Stalinism.Lajos Bokros, finance minister for Horn, attempted a turnaround with an austerity package (since known as the Bokros package) that called for the dismantling of the last vestiges of Hungary’s expensive cradle-to-grave socialist policies. He devalued the currency, reduced social benefits, and accelerated the sale…Lalu Prasad Yadav (born June 11, 1948, Phulwaria, near Gopalganj, India) Indian politician and government official who in 1997 founded and then served as the longtime president of the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD; National People’s Party) political party in Bihar state, eastern India. He was also the former chief minister (head of government) of Bihar (1990–97).

Lalu was born into a Yadav-caste family of poor farmers in a village in northwestern Bihar. He completed bachelor’s and law degrees at Patna University. His political career started early, while he was at the university. He became a student leader and came under the tutelage of the socialist activist and theorist Jaya Prakash Narayan. Yadav joined Narayan’s protests against the policies of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in the early and mid-1970s. He was arrested in 1975 during the state of emergency declared by Gandhi and was detained until 1977.

After his release, Yadav was elected to the Lok Sabha (lower chamber of the Indian parliament) as a representative of the newly formed Janata (People’s) Party (JP), which was opposed to Gandhi’s rule. In 1980 he ran for a seat in the Bihar state assembly elections and defeated the Indian National Congress (Congress Party) candidate. He was reelected to that seat in 1985. For most of 1989 he functioned as the leader of the opposition in the assembly, but late that year-and by then a member of the Janata Dal (JD; People’s Party)-he won a second term in the Lok Sabha.

Yadav by then had developed a campaign platform that mobilized lower-caste Hindus and the minority Muslim population and made him a champion of social justice. The support of those two communities contributed immensely to his electoral success. He returned to state politics in 1990, winning an assembly seat and becoming Bihar’s chief minister. He retained his assembly seat in the 1995 elections and began his second term as chief minister.

Yadav’s political career hit a snag, however, following allegations, beginning in 1996, that he and a number of Bihar’s other leading bureaucrats and politicians were implicated in a corruption scandal (often called the fodder scam) involving the embezzlement of tens of millions of dollars of state money that supposedly was to be used to purchase animal feed. Yadav was forced to resign as chief minister in July 1997, but he installed his wife, Rabri Devi, as his successor, and it was widely believed that he remained in charge of the state administration. In December 2006 Yadav was acquitted of the original corruption charges.

Also in July 1997, after having stepped down as chief minister, he broke with the JD and formed the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD), of which he became the president. In 1998 he was reelected to the Lok Sabha and in 2002 he won a seat in the Rajya Sabha (upper chamber of the parliament). In between, he ran for and garnered a seat in the 2000 Bihar assembly. The RJD formed a coalition government with the Congress and other parties, with Rabri Devi again serving as chief minister.

In 2004, following his reelection to the Lok Sabha, Yadav was appointed as the minister for railways in the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance government, staying in that post until 2009. During his tenure there, he was instrumental in making the chronically deficit-ridden national railway system a profitable undertaking. His management techniques were studied in business classes, and in 2009 he was included on a list of India’s most powerful leaders.

While he was being lauded for his performance as a cabinet minister, however, the political fortunes of his party were sinking. In the 2005 Bihar assembly elections, the RJD could win only 54 of the chamber’s 243 seats, and the coalition government stepped down from power. The party’s poor performance continued in the 2009 Lok Sabha elections (it won only 4 of the 44 seats it contested), and Yadav himself lost in one of the two constituencies in which he ran. A year later the RJD could muster only 22 seats in state assembly elections. Those setbacks drastically undermined Yadav’s political weight in New Delhi. More were to come. In 2012 fresh charges related to the 1996 animal-feed scandal were brought. At a trial in September 2013 he was convicted on fraud charges, and in October he was sentenced to five years in prison. He appealed the ruling and was released on bail in mid-December. Although he was forced to relinquish his Lok Sabha seat, he continued to lead the RJD. In 2017 Yadav was convicted of additional charges related to the scandal. While serving that three and a half-year sentence, he was convicted in a third fodder scam case in 2018, receiving a five-year sentence.Lauren Bacall,  (born September 16, 1924, New York, New York, U.S.-died August 12, 2014, New York, New York), American actress known for her portrayals of provocative women who hid their soft core underneath a layer of hard-edged pragmatism.

Bacall started modeling in 1941 and supplemented her income with jobs as a theatre usher and as a hostess at the Stage Door Canteen, which kept her next to the Broadway theatre scene that she loved. In 1942 she appeared as an ingénue in the George S. Kaufman-directed Franklin Street, but the play closed before reaching New York. Bacall’s photo on the cover of Harper’s Bazaar in 1943 caught the attention of the wife of film director Howard Hawks. Cast in Hawks’s To Have and Have Not (1944) as the leggy sardonic beauty who gives Humphrey Bogart a famous lesson in whistling, the 19-year-old Bacall was an overnight sensation. Nervous throughout the shooting, Bacall kept her head low to keep it from shaking; this, combined with her bedroom eyes and husky voice, resulted in a sultry aura that was touted in promotional campaigns as "The Look." She and Bogart fell in love during the filming and were married in 1945; they subsequently costarred in the successful thrillers The Big Sleep (1946), Dark Passage (1947), and Key Largo (1948). Bacall’s other successful films include Young Man with a Horn (1950), How to Marry a Millionaire (1953), and Designing Woman (1957).

After Bogart’s death in 1957, Bacall worked sporadically, appearing in one Broadway flop (Goodbye Charlie, 1959) and one hit (Cactus Flower, 1965) and in such films as Sex and the Single Girl (1964) and Harper (1966). In 1961 she married actor Jason Robards (divorced 1969). Bacall made a stunning comeback in the Broadway musical Applause (1970), for which she won a Tony Award as best actress. Her career revitalized, she went on to essay memorable roles in such films as Murder on the Orient Express (1974), The Shootist (1976), and The Fan (1981). She returned to Broadway in 1981 and won a second Tony Award for Woman of the Year.

Bacall’s performances of the 1990s, most of which capitalized on her brash-but-endearing personality, are among her most respected. She received good notices for supporting roles in Misery (1990), The Portrait (1993; made for television), My Fellow Americans (1996), and Diamonds (1999). For her performance in The Mirror Has Two Faces (1996), Bacall received her first Academy Award nomination, for best supporting actress. Her later films include Dogville (2003) and Birth (2004), both of which also featured Nicole Kidman, and The Walker (2007). In 1999 she scored another Broadway triumph in a revival of Noël Coward’s Waiting in the Wings. Bacall wrote three autobiographies-By Myself (1978), Now (1994), and And Then Some (2005).Lauritz Melchior,  (born March 20, 1890, Copenhagen, Den.-died March 18, 1973, Santa Monica, Calif., U.S.), Danish-U.S. tenor. He debuted as a baritone in 1913 but further study extended his range upward, and he made his tenor debut as Tannhäuser in 1918. Additional training readied him for Bayreuth, where he sang (1924–31), and he remained the preeminent Wagnerian tenor of his time, regularly singing (often opposite Kirsten Flagstad) at Covent Garden (until 1939) and the Metropolitan Opera (1926–50) and making many recordings.Léon Degrelle,  (born June 15, 1906, Bouillon, Belg.-died  March 31, 1994, Málaga, Spain), founder and leader of the Rexist Party of Belgium, who collaborated with the Germans during World War II.

After failing three times to pass his final law exams at the Catholic University of Leuven (Louvain), Degrelle, who was a dynamic orator, entered politics. Using banking scandals and the corruption of national parties as issues, he organized the Rexist Movement in 1930, allegedly to cleanse the Roman Catholic religion of political contamination. Though originally a wing of the ruling Catholic Party, the Rexist Movement became an opposition party and, under Degrelle’s guidance, elected 21 deputies to the Belgian Parliament in 1936. Subsidized by the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, Degrelle turned the Rexists into a fascist organization. In alliance with the 16 deputies of the separatist Flemish Nationalist Party, the Rexists forced the formation of weak coalition governments in the late 1930s.

During World War II Degrelle collaborated with the German occupation forces. In August 1941 he formed and later commanded the Walloon and Flemish storm-trooper brigades that fought on the Russian front. Under his guidance the Rexists took control of local governments and newspapers in Belgium. After Belgium was liberated (September 1944) he was sentenced in absentia to death as a collaborator. Degrelle flew to Spain in the last days of the war after fighting the Soviet advance into eastern Germany. In Spain he was protected by Francisco Franco and became a Spanish citizen.…1949; he was succeeded by Leonid Melnikov. Purges in party ranks were relatively mild. However, real and alleged Nazi collaborators, former German prisoners of war and repatriated slave workers, Ukrainian "bourgeois nationalists," and others suspected of disloyalty-essentially hundreds of thousands of people-were sent to concentration camps in the far north…Leslie Odom, Jr. (born August 6, 1981, Queens, New York, U.S.) is a multifaceted actor and singer best known for his breakout role as statesman Aaron Burr in Lin-Manuel Miranda’s blockbuster Broadway musical Hamilton (2015–16). Starring opposite Miranda, who played the title role of Alexander Hamilton, Odom brought Hamilton’s rival and eventual murderer to life with his layered and thoughtful performance as Burr. Odom earned a Tony Award for best actor in a musical and a Grammy Award for best musical theater album for performing as a principal soloist on Hamilton’s original cast recording.

Odom was raised in Philadelphia, where his mother was a nursing home recreation director and his father was a salesman. He developed a love of singing as a child, performing at the Canaan Baptist Church his family attended. When he was 13 years old, he won an oratory competition on African American history and received a scholarship to Philadelphia’s nonprofit Freedom Theatre, Pennsylvania’s oldest African American theater. In his first role at Freedom Theatre he portrayed an enslaved person in playwright William Gibson’s The Miracle Worker. When he was 16 years old, Odom auditioned for the Broadway musical Rent, and he joined the cast at age 17, while he was still in high school, as a replacement member of the ensemble. He credits his time as a Rent cast member with fostering his appreciation for musical theater. In a 2023 interview with Broadway Direct, he recalled: "That show brought me and a generation of artists to the theater. It told us that a piece of work on Broadway could be artistically fulfilling, culturally relevant, and commercially successful."

Although he had an offer to continue on Broadway in another production, Odom left New York City to attend Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, graduating with honors in 2003 from the School of Drama. The summer after finishing college, Odom relocated to Los Angeles, where he pursued singing gigs and landed roles in television series, including the police drama CSI: Miami (2003–06), the serial drama Vanished (2006), and the sitcom Big Day (2006–07). He returned to New York City to work on the musical drama TV series Smash (2012–13). Odom also appeared in supporting roles in the science-fiction drama series Person of Interest (2013–14) and the crime drama series Law & Order: Special Victims Unit (2013–15).

In 2013 Odom attended a rehearsal of the musical that would eventually become Hamilton that was organized by Miranda, and he was interested in being part of the show from the beginning, when Miranda was still working through the concept. As the production took shape, Odom was invited to read for the part of Aaron Burr. He actively pursued the role, despite being already booked to perform in the espionage thriller TV series State of Affairs (2014–15). Hamilton opened Off-Broadway in January 2015 and shortly thereafter moved to Broadway, where it won 11 Tony Awards. Odom garnered critical acclaim for his powerful portrayal of Burr. His final appearance as Burr came in July 2016, when the show’s original Broadway run ended, and both he and Miranda, as well as costar Phillipa Soo (Eliza Hamilton), left the cast. In a 2016 interview with The New York Times, Odom reflected that he had developed sympathy for Burr after portraying him on Broadway: "None of us wants to be judged by our worst act on our worst day, and we consistently judge Burr for that. He was not a perfect man, but he’s not a villain."

Odom joined 21 other Hamilton original cast members in insisting upon a profit-sharing plan when the show became a financial success. The cast members refused the lump-sum payments that are common in the industry and instead demanded future royalties from the show they had helped to create, an act that could potentially change the way actors on Broadway are financially compensated in the future.

In addition to his theater work, Odom has also recorded several albums. His eponymous debut, released in 2014, was partially funded via the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter to the tune of more than $40,000. The 2016 rerelease of the album reached number one on the Billboard jazz chart. He followed his debut album with Simply Christmas (original release 2016, rerelease 2017) and Mr (2019), an album of original music that features the standout tracks "Remember Black" and "Cold." Later in 2020 he released The Christmas Album, and in 2023 he offered up When a Crooner Dies, another album of original songs, which featured deeply personal tracks, such as the single "Show Me."

Odom also returned to the stage in 2023, joining the cast of Ossie Davis’s Purlie Victorious: A Non-Confederate Romp Through the Cotton Patch, a satire set in the 1950s. He played the title role of Purlie Victorious, a preacher trying to create a desegregated congregation in the Jim Crow South. On television, Odom voiced the role of Owen Tillerman in the animated musical comedy series Central Park (2020– ), for which he received an Emmy Award nomination for outstanding character voice-over performance. On the silver screen, he starred as abolitionist William Still in the Harriet Tubman biopic Harriet (2019), and he played legendary soul music singer Sam Cooke in the drama One Night in Miami… (2020). For his role as Cooke, whom Odom credits as a major inspiration, he received an Academy Award nomination, a BAFTA Award nomination, and a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, among others. He also garnered an Academy Award nomination for the song "Speak Now," which he cowrote and performed for the film’s soundtrack. Odom starred with Miranda and Soo in the live stage recording for the 2020 film version of Hamilton. In 2022 he played scientist Lionel Toussaint in the murder mystery Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery.

His autobiography, Failing Up: How to Take Risks, Aim Higher and Never Stop Learning, which is written in the style of a graduation commencement speech, was released in 2018. He married fellow actress Nicolette Robinson in 2012, and they have two children.…experiment by the American physicist Lloyd Kreuzer established to within 1 part in 20,000 that different materials produce gravitational fields with a strength the same as that of gravitational fields acting upon them. In this experiment a sphere of solid material was moved through a liquid of identical weight density.…Louis II,  (born 846-died  April 10, 879, Compiègne, Fr.) king of Francia Occidentalis (the West Frankish kingdom) from 877 until his death.

Louis, the son of King Charles II the Bald, was made king of Aquitaine under his father’s tutelage in 867. Charles became emperor in 875 and two years later left Louis as regent while he defended Italy for Pope John VIII. Louis was elected king of the West Franks in December 877. At a council at Troyes in 878, the Pope attempted to force Louis to take up the role of defender of the papacy, but Louis refused. Louis and his cousin Louis the Younger, ruler of the East Frankish kingdom, agreed to maintain the division of Lotharingia that their respective fathers had negotiated in the Treaty of Mersen in 870. Louis had hoped to redistribute offices of state but was frustrated by the Frankish magnates, who had accepted him as king on the condition that he respect their possessions and rights.Louis XIV (born September 5, 1638, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France-died September 1, 1715, Versailles, France) king of France (1643–1715) who ruled his country, principally from his great palace at Versailles, during one of its most brilliant periods and who remains the symbol of absolute monarchy of the classical age. Internationally, in a series of wars between 1667 and 1697, he extended France’s eastern borders at the expense of the Habsburgs and then, in the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–14), engaged a hostile European coalition in order to secure the Spanish throne for his grandson.

Louis was the son of Louis XIII and his Spanish queen, Anne of Austria. He succeeded his father on May 14, 1643. At the age of four years and eight months, he was, according to the laws of the kingdom, not only the master but the owner of the bodies and property of 19 million subjects. Although he was saluted as "a visible divinity," he was, nonetheless, a neglected child given over to the care of servants. He once narrowly escaped drowning in a pond because no one was watching him. Anne of Austria, who was to blame for this negligence, inspired him with a lasting fear of "crimes committed against God."

Louis was nine years old when the nobles and the Paris Parlement (a powerful law court), driven by hatred of the prime minister Jules Cardinal Mazarin, rose against the crown in 1648. This marked the beginning of the long civil war known as the Fronde, in the course of which Louis suffered poverty, misfortune, fear, humiliation, cold, and hunger. These trials shaped the future character, behaviour, and mode of thought of the young king. He would never forgive either Paris, the nobles, or the common people.

In 1653 Mazarin was victorious over the rebels and then proceeded to construct an extraordinary administrative apparatus with Louis as his pupil. The young king also acquired Mazarin’s partiality for the arts, elegance, and display. Although he had been proclaimed of age, the king did not dream of disputing the cardinal’s absolute power.

The war begun in 1635 between France and Spain was then entering its last phase. The outcome of the war would transfer European hegemony from the Habsburgs to the Bourbons. A French king had to be a soldier, and so Louis served his apprenticeship on the battlefield.

In 1658 Louis faced the great conflict between love and duty, a familiar one for princes of that period. He struggled with himself for two years over his love for Mazarin’s niece, Marie Mancini. He finally submitted to the exigencies of politics and in 1660 married Marie-Thérèse of Austria, daughter of King Philip IV of Spain, in order to ratify peace between their two countries.

The childhood of Louis XIV was at an end, but no one believed him capable of seizing the reins of power. No one suspected his thoughts. He wrote in his Mémoires:

Mazarin died on March 9, 1661. The dramatic blow came on March 10. The king informed his astonished ministers that he intended to assume all responsibility for ruling the kingdom. This had not occurred since the reign of Henry IV. It cannot be overemphasized that Louis XIV’s action was not in accordance with tradition; his concept of a dictatorship by divine right was his own. In genuine faith, Louis viewed himself as God’s representative on earth and considered all disobedience and rebellion to be sinful. From this conviction he gained not only a dangerous feeling of infallibility but also considerable serenity and moderation.

He was backed up first by the great ministers Jean-Baptiste Colbert, marquis de Louvois, and Hugues de Lionne, among whom he fostered dissension, and later by men of lesser capacity. For 54 years Louis devoted himself to his task eight hours a day; not the smallest detail escaped his attention. He wanted to control everything from court etiquette to troop movements, from road building to theological disputes. He succeeded because he faithfully reflected the mood of a France overflowing with youth and vigour and enamoured of grandeur.

Despite the use of pensions and punishments, the monarchy had been unable to subdue the nobles, who had started 11 civil wars in 40 years. Louis lured them to his court, corrupted them with gambling, exhausted them with dissipation, and made their destinies dependent on their capacity to please him. Etiquette became a means of governing. From that time, the nobility ceased to be an important factor in French politics, which in some respects weakened the nation.Lucius Cornelius Balbus,  (born c. 100, Gades [present-day Cádiz, Spain]-died after 32 bc, Rome), wealthy naturalized Roman, important in Roman politics in the last years of the republic.

In 72 bc Pompey the Great conferred Roman citizenship on Balbus and his family for his services against the rebel Quintus Sertorius in Spain. Balbus became friends with several prominent politicians; in Rome he played a part in the formation of the alliance in 60 between Julius Caesar, Pompey, and Marcus Crassus.

Balbus had impressed Caesar, who in 62 appointed him chief of staff in his praetorship. This appointment may have continued into Caesar’s proconsulate in Spain (61–60). Balbus held the position again when Caesar was consul in Rome in 59. During Caesar’s years as proconsul in Gaul (58–50), Balbus helped watch over his interests in Rome. In 56 Balbus was prosecuted for the alleged illegality of his naturalization (an attack aimed chiefly at the three dynasts, Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus). Pompey, Crassus, and Cicero defended Balbus, and he was acquitted. In 50–49 he tried to prevent the outbreak of civil war, and later he attempted to mediate between his friends Caesar and Pompey; for these actions he hoped to gain Cicero’s support.

Balbus refused to fight against Pompey, but he became Caesar’s chief agent in Rome, thus adding to his immense fortune. He helped Cicero in his political and economic difficulties and remained his friend by judicious flattery.

In 44 he met Octavian (the future Augustus) on his arrival in Italy and introduced him to Cicero, then supported him throughout the Civil Wars. Probably praetor after Caesar’s death, in 40 he became the first naturalized Roman to hold a consulship. He died after 32 bc, leaving 25 denarii to every citizen.

His nephew of the same name (sometimes called Lucius Cornelius Balbus Minor ["the Younger"] to distinguish them) remained a friend of Augustus. Balbus Minor was the first naturalized Roman-and the last man not related to an emperor-to celebrate a triumph (19 bc).Lucius Junius Moderatus Columella,  (born 1st century ad, Gades, Spain), Roman soldier and farmer who wrote extensively on agriculture and kindred subjects in the hope of arousing a love for farming and a simple life. He became in early life a tribune of the legion stationed in Syria, but neither an army career nor the law attracted him, and he took up farming in Italy.

The De re rustica, in 12 books, his second and fuller treatment of farming and country life, has survived, as has De arboribus ("On Trees"), which was part of an earlier work. Both are written in a lucid, nontechnical style. Of Husbandry (1745) is an English translation of De re rustica and De arboribus.Ma Duanlin (born 1254?, Leping [now in Jiangxi province], China-died 1323) Chinese historian who wrote the Wenxian tongkao ("General Study of the Literary Remains"), a huge encyclopaedia of general knowledge. This work, with the works of two other historians of the Song dynasty (960–1279), Zheng Qiao (1104–62) and Sima Guang (1019–86), is considered one of the greatest institutional histories ever written on China and, as such, was a model for many later historians. Ma insisted that a knowledge of institutional history was just as necessary to the Confucian official as knowledge of the Confucian Classics.…(Leung) and Su Lizhen (Maggie Cheung), a man and a woman whose spouses are having an affair. The film’s lush score and detailed recreations of 1960s fashions and interiors, as well as the restrained yet emotional performances of Cheung and Leung, won it the instant acclaim of many as……pairs champions Tatyana Totmyanina and Maksim Marinin gave exceptionally brilliant performances, while ice dancing gold medalists Tatyana Navka and Roman Kostomarov skated without mistakes to win a somewhat lacklustre competition. Irina Slutskaya, the favourite in the women’s competition, had to settle for the bronze medal after Japan’s Arakawa ShizukaManṣūr (flourished 17th century, India) a leading member of the 17th-century Jahāngīr studio of Mughal painters, famed for his animal and bird studies. The emperor Jahāngīr honoured him with the title Nādir al-ʿAsr ("Wonder of the Age"), and in his memoirs Jahāngīr praises Manṣūr as "unique in his generation" in the art of drawing. Manṣūr was primarily a natural history painter who avoided personal expression in his careful studies.

Manṣūr made many studies of natural life under the direct orders of his patron, who was passionately fond of recording the rare specimens that were brought before him. A turkey cock painted about 1612 (Victoria and Albert Museum, London) is attributed to Manṣūr and marks that bird’s first appearance in India. Similarly, while on a trip to the Vale of Kashmir, Jahāngīr ordered Manṣūr to paint as many varieties of local flowers as possible, stating in his memoirs that the number depicted exceeded 100.…was killed by his son Maodun, under whose long reign (c. 209–174 bce) the Xiongnu became a major power and a serious menace to China. In many respects the Xiongnu are the eastern counterpart of the Scythians. The Chinese historian Sima Qian (c. 145–c. 87 bce) described the nomadic tactics…Marcel Camus (born April 21, 1912, Chappes, Ardennes, Fr.-died  Jan. 13, 1982, Paris) French motion-picture director who won international acclaim for his second film, Orfeu Negro (Black Orpheus) in 1958. The film was praised for its use of exotic settings and brilliant spectacle and won first prize at both the Cannes and Venice film festivals as well as an Oscar from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

Camus, educated as an art teacher, spent most of World War II as a prisoner of war, after which he entered the film industry as an assistant and technical adviser to directors Jacques Feyder and Luis Buñuel and others.

Morte en fraude (1956; Fugitive in Saigon, 1957), Camus’s first feature film, was a protest against the war in Indochina and received little attention. Later films-such as L’Oiseau de paradis (1961; Dragon Sky, 1964), Le Chant du monde (1965; "The Song of the World"), and Otalia de Bahia (1976)-also failed to attract the interest of critics and the public in the way that Orfeu Negro had.Marie Laurencin,  (born October 31, 1883, Paris, France-died June 8, 1956, Paris), French painter, printmaker, and stage designer known for her delicate portraits of elegant, vaguely melancholic women.

From 1903 to 1904 Laurencin studied art at the Humbert Academy in Paris. Among her fellow students was Georges Braque, who, with Pablo Picasso, soon developed the style of painting known as Cubism. The art dealer Clovis Sagot introduced Laurencin to Picasso in 1907, and she consequently became involved in the avant-garde milieu of the Cubists. Although Laurencin exhibited with the Cubist artists, she did not herself exploit the movement’s idiom. Her paintings typically are stylized depictions of pale, dark-eyed women and girls painted in pastel colours. The American expatriate writer Gertrude Stein, an important patron of avant-garde artists, was one of the first buyers of Laurencin’s work.

Laurencin was romantically involved with the poet Guillaume Apollinaire for several years and produced several portraits of him and of their mutual friends, such as Group of Artists (1908). She illustrated several books, including a 1930 edition of Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland. Her stage designs included scenery for the Ballets Russes (1924) and the Comédie Française (1928).Dame Marie Rambert,  (born Feb. 20, 1888, Warsaw, Pol., Russian Empire-died June 12, 1982, London, Eng.), ballet producer, director, and teacher who founded Ballet Rambert, the oldest English ballet company still performing.

A student of Émile Jaques-Dalcroze, the originator of eurhythmics, Rambert was invited in 1913 to teach this technique of rhythmic education to members of Serge Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes; through her teaching she influenced Vaslav Nijinsky’s controversial choreography for L’Après-midi d’un faune and Le Sacre du printemps. While with Diaghilev’s company, Rambert studied with the eminent ballet teacher Enrico Cecchetti and later joined Diaghilev’s corps de ballet. She continued her ballet training in London, staging her first ballet in 1917 and becoming a British citizen in 1918, following her marriage that year to the playwright Ashley Dukes.

Utilizing Cecchetti’s teaching methods, she established a ballet school in 1920 and in 1926 produced the first ballet choreographed by her student Frederick Ashton, who became one of the world’s most eminent choreographers. In 1930 she helped found the Camargo Society, which gave enormous impetus to English ballet, and established the Ballet Club, which in 1935 became Ballet Rambert. As Ballet Rambert’s director she was characterized by a willingness to experiment and by a desire to develop fully the style of any particular dancer or ballet. She gave strong support to such young British choreographers as Ashton, Antony Tudor, Andrée Howard, Frank Staff, Walter Gore, and Norman Morrice and presented their works in London at the Mercury Theatre, owned by her husband. Dancers who began their careers with Ballet Rambert include Pearl Argyle, Maude Lloyd, Peggy van Praagh, Sally Gilmour, Celia Franca, and Hugh Laing, all of whom became noted for the individuality of their interpretations. Rambert also helped establish such designers as Sophie Fedorovitch, Hugh Stevenson, and William Chappell, formerly a dancer with Ballet Club.

Rambert relied primarily on British dancers, choreographers, and designers, thus helping to eliminate the general English preference for foreign ballet artists. For her part in establishing English ballet, she was made Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1954 and Dame of the Order of the British Empire in 1962. She was coauthor of Dancers of Mercury: The Story of Ballet Rambert (1960) and translator of Ulànova: Her Childhood and Schooldays (1962).Marisol,  (born May 22, 1930, Paris, France-died April 30, 2016, New York, New York, U.S.), American sculptor of boxlike figurative works combining wood and other materials and often grouped as tableaux. She rose to fame during the 1960s and all but disappeared from art history until the 21st century.

Marisol was born in Paris of Venezuelan parents and spent her youth in Los Angeles and Paris, studying briefly at the École des Beaux-Arts (1949). In 1950 she moved to New York City, where she studied at the Art Students League and the Hans Hofmann School of Fine Arts. From her earliest, roughly carved figures, she worked mainly in wood.

In New York she made ties with the Abstract Expressionists-Willem de Kooning, Franz Kline, and Jackson Pollock, among them. Though she is often associated with Pop art, she incorporated many influences into her work (folk art, pre-Columbian art, Cubism, Dadaism, collage) and thus defies classification. She gained wide recognition in the 1960s for her mixed-media figure groups; the juxtaposition of blockish inert forms and their painted, cast-plaster, or found-object features and accoutrements lend the works a deadpan irony. Many of her works depict variations of the family unit. Her portrait groups of public figures such as Charles de Gaulle and Lyndon B. Johnson (both 1967) are particularly satirical. In 1961 she was included in the Museum of Modern Art exhibition "The Art of Assemblage." The next year and then again in 1964 she had wildly successful solo exhibitions at the Stable Gallery in New York City. During the 1960s and ’70s, Marisol was firmly situated within Andy Warhol’s social and artistic orbit; she became a close friend of his and earned roles in his films Kiss (1963) and 13 Most Beautiful Women (1964).

In the 1970s, ’80s, and ’90s she continued to make portrait sculptures of artists (Georgia O’Keeffe with Dogs, 1977, and Portrait of Marcel Duchamp, 1981) and political figures (Bishop Desmond Tutu, 1988). She also began to address historical events, as in Blackfoot Delegation to Washington 1916 (1993), which makes reference to the Native American Blackfoot tribe’s attempt to negotiate with the United States government for land rights.

In 2014–15 a retrospective and scholarly catalog of Marisol’s sculptures and works on paper (organized by the Memphis Brooks Museum of Art, Memphis, Tennessee; traveled to the El Museo del Barrio in New York City) helped to reintroduce her and reestablish her name in the history of art.…"giraffe-style" design (Giraffenflügel; 1804) of Martin Seuffert of Vienna, with one side straight and one bent, as on a grand piano.Mencius,  (born c. 371, ancient state of Zou, China-died c. 289 bce, China), early Chinese philosopher whose development of orthodox Confucianism earned him the title "second sage." Chief among his basic tenets was an emphasis on the obligation of rulers to provide for the common people. The book Mencius records his doings and sayings and contains statements on the goodness of human nature, a topic warmly debated by Confucianists up to modern times.

Of noble origin, the Meng family settled in the state of Zou, a minor state in the present province of Shantung. Mencius was born there about 372 bce. In several respects his life was similar to that of Confucius. Zou and Lu (the state of Confucius’ origin) were adjacent states. Like Confucius, Mencius was only three when he lost his father. Mencius’ mother paid special attention to the upbringing of her young son. A traditional story tells of her moving their home several times and finally settling near a school, so that the boy should have the right kind of environmental influence, and of her encouraging her son to persevere in his studies. Among the Chinese, the mother of Mencius has been for ages upheld as the model mother.

As a young scholar Mencius had for his mentor a pupil of Zisi, who was himself the grandson of Confucius. Thus, the continuity of the Confucian orthodoxy in all its purity was assured. In due time Mencius became a teacher himself and for a brief period served as an official in the state of Qi. He spent much time traveling, offering his advice and counsel to the various princes on government by ren ("human-heartedness"), or humane government. The effort was foredoomed because the times were chaotic, and the contending princes were interested not in humane government but in power.

The Zhou dynasty (c. 1046–256 bce) was founded on the feudalistic principle of a sociopolitical hierarchy, with clearly defined prerogatives and obligations between those of high and low status. As time went on, however, ambition and intrigue resulted in usurpations and impositions, eroding the feudalistic system at the root and bringing on a condition of political and moral disorder. This trend, which caused alarm to Confucius, continued to worsen at an accelerating rate, and the age in which Mencius lived is known in Chinese history as the period of Warring States (475–221 bce). Under such conditions, Mencius’ preachments to the princes on virtuous personal conduct and humane government fell on deaf ears; yet he continued to speak his mind, even though he knew that he was championing an unpopular cause.

According to Mencius, the ruler was to provide for the welfare of the people in two respects: material conditions for their livelihood and moral and educational guidance for their edification. Mencius had worked out a definite program to attain economic sufficiency for the common people. He also advocated light taxes, free trade, conservation of natural resources, welfare measures for the old and disadvantaged, and more nearly equal sharing of wealth. It was his fundamental belief that "only when the people had a steady livelihood would they have a steady heart."

While Mencius patiently exhorted the princes to cultivate the way of moral power and to forsake the way of force and intrigue, he also reminded them emphatically of the responsibility that came to them with the mandate of Heaven to govern for the good of the people. With unusual courage, Mencius declared: "The people are the most important element in a nation; the spirits of the land and grain come next; the sovereign counts for the least." He also quoted for all to hear from the Shujing ("Classic of History"), one of the Five Classics of Confucianism, the saying "Heaven sees as the people see; Heaven hears as the people hear." The outspoken sympathies of Mencius made him a champion of the common people and an advocate of democratic principles in government.

Mencius’ sojourn covered several states, but nowhere did he find a prince willing to put his lofty principles of government into practice. His sense of disappointment grew with the years and finally brought him back to his native state of Zou, where he devoted the remaining years of his life to the instruction of his pupils. The work Mencius is a collection of the records of the doings and sayings of the master by his disciples, arranged in seven books with two parts to each book.

The philosophic ideas of Mencius might be regarded as an amplification of the teachings of Confucius. Confucius taught the concept of ren, love or human-heartedness, as the basic virtue of manhood. Mencius made the original goodness of human nature (xing) the keynote to his system. That the four beginnings (siduan)-the feeling of commiseration, the feeling of shame, the feeling of courtesy, and the feeling of right and wrong-are all inborn in man was a self-evident truth to Mencius; and the "four beginnings," when properly cultivated, will develop into the four cardinal virtues of ren, righteousness (yi), decorum (li), and wisdom (zhi). This doctrine of the goodness of human nature on the part of Mencius has become an enduring topic for debate among the Chinese thinkers throughout the ages.

Mencius went further and taught that man possessed intuitive knowledge and intuitive ability and that personal cultivation consisted in developing one’s mind. Mencius said: "Persons who have developed their hearts and minds to the utmost, know their nature. Knowing their nature, they know Heaven." Hence, all people can become like the great sage-kings Yao and Shun, the legendary heroes of the archaic past, according to Mencius.

While Mencius has always been regarded as a major philosopher, special importance was attributed to him and his work by the neo-Confucians of the Song dynasty (960–1279). For the last 1,000 years, Mencius has been revered among the Chinese people as the cofounder of Confucianism, second only to Confucius himself.

Among the several translations of the Mencius into the English language, the one by James Legge, The Chinese Classics, vol. 2, Mencius, 2nd ed. (1893–95; 3rd ed., 1960), is a pioneering attempt. The translation by D.C. Lau, Mencius (1979), is the standard one.Michael Gough (born Nov. 23, 1916, Kuala Lumpur, Federated Malay States [now Malaysia]-died March 17, 2011, England) British character actor who was known for his roles in horror films as well as for his portrayal of Batman’s butler Alfred Pennyworth in four Batman films.

Gough was born to British parents in Malaya, and he grew up in England after his family’s return to that country when he was six years old. He attended the University of London’s agricultural college before deciding to pursue a career in acting, and in 1936 he began training and performing at the Old Vic theatre. In 1937 Gough made his Broadway debut in the drama Love of Women, and the following year he made his London debut in The Zeal of Thy House. He graced the stage numerous times, with a theatre career spanning more than five decades, save for a break during World War II, when he served in the army. Notable roles included turns as Laertes in Hamlet (1951) and as Ernest in Bedroom Farce (1977, 1979)-the latter of which earned him a Tony Award (1979).

Though he acted in more than 70 feature films, Gough did not begin his movie career until he was in his 30s. He made his big-screen debut in 1948, when he appeared in the dramas Anna Karenina, Blanche Fury, and Saraband for Dead Lovers. In addition, he began working on television in 1946, and he later had recurring roles on such notable shows as Doctor Who and The Avengers. In 1956 he won his first BAFTA (British Academy of Film and Television Arts) award, for best television actor.

Gough maintained simultaneous careers on stage, screen, and TV throughout much of the late 20th century. Perhaps best known for his often-overacted horror roles, Gough appeared in such films as Horrors of the Black Museum (1959), Berserk (1967), and Satan’s Slave (1976; U.S. title Evil Heritage, 1979). He also portrayed Arthur Holmwood in famed horror studio Hammer Films’ Horror of Dracula (1958) and the evil Lord Ambrose D’Arcy in that studio’s The Phantom of the Opera (1962).

In 1989 Gough first played Alfred in Tim Burton’s Batman. He reprised the role in Burton’s Batman Returns (1992) and then in Batman Forever (1995) and Batman & Robin (1997), both of which were directed by Joel Schumacher. Gough continued to work with Burton into his 90s, appearing in Sleepy Hollow (1999) and providing the voice of the underworld’s Elder Gutknecht in the animated film Corpse Bride (2005) and the voice of the Dodo Bird in Alice in Wonderland (2010).Michał Choromański,  (born June 22, 1904, Yelizavetgrad, Ukraine, Russian Empire [now Kirovograd, Ukraine]-died May 24, 1972, Warsaw, Poland), Polish novelist and playwright best known for his novelistic studies of psychological states.

Born into a Polish family in Russia, Choromański went to Poland in 1924 and began translating Polish poetry into Russian, publishing in Russian émigré periodicals. His novel Zazdrość i medycyna (1933; Jealousy and Medicine), a clinical study of the relationship between medicine and sex, was an instant success. At the outbreak of World War II he fled Poland and lived in South America and Canada, respectively, before returning to Poland in 1957. His later fiction includes Schodami w górę, schodami w dół (1967; "Upstairs, Downstairs"), W rzecz wstąpić (1968; "To Get to the Heart of the Matter"), and Słowacki wysp tropikalnych (1969; "Słowacki of the Tropical Island"), all distinguished by an ironic treatment of society, sarcastic humour generally, and a variety of narrative forms. Initially a favourite with sophisticated readers, Choromański eventually became popular with the general reading public.Mick Dodson,  (born April 10, 1950, Katherine, Northern Territory, Australia), Australian Aboriginal political activist and scholar who was named the 2009 Australian of the Year in recognition of his work to help better the lives of the country’s Indigenous peoples and to promote reconciliation between Australia’s Indigenous and non-Indigenous residents.

Through his Aboriginal mother, Dodson was a member of the Yawuru people of the Broome region of Western Australia. He studied at Monash University in Melbourne, where he earned Bachelor of Jurisprudence and Bachelor of Laws degrees before joining (1976) the Victorian Aboriginal Legal Service. He later directed the Northern Land Council and from 1988 to 1990 served as counsel to the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody. In 1993 he was appointed the country’s first Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social justice commissioner, a post he held until 1998. In 2003 Dodson became the first Indigenous Australian to be named a law professor at the Australian National University (ANU) College of Law. Two years later he became director of the National Centre for Indigenous Studies at ANU. He was also a moving force behind the organization Reconciliation Australia, which pushed for the historic formal apology that Prime Minister Kevin Rudd delivered in February 2008 for wrongs committed by past governments against generations of Aboriginal people. In addition, Dodson was involved in efforts to establish a national Indigenous representative body and to improve access to education for all Australian children.

Aside from his work on behalf of Australian Aboriginal people, Dodson was also involved in advocating for the rights of other indigenous peoples around the world. In 2005 he became a member of the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues; he had previously served on the board of trustees of the UN Voluntary Fund for Indigenous Populations. Dodson assisted in drafting the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which was adopted by the UN General Assembly in September 2007.The original members were Mick Fleetwood (b. June 24, 1947, Redruth, Cornwall, England), John McVie (b. November 26, 1945, London, England), Peter Green (original name Peter Greenbaum; b. October 29, 1946, London-d. July 25, 2020, Canvey Island, Sussex), and Jeremy Spencer (b. July 4, 1948, West Hartlepool, Durham, England).……of his conservative postmaster general, Montgomery Blair. Eventually Frémont withdrew and Blair resigned. The party was reunited in time for the election of 1864.Muhammad (born c. 570, Mecca, Arabia [now in Saudi Arabia]-died June 8, 632, Medina)   the founder of Islam and the proclaimer of the Qurʾān. Muhammad is traditionally said to have been born in 570 in Mecca and to have died in 632 in Medina, where he had been forced to emigrate to with his adherents in 622.

The Qurʾān yields little concrete biographical information about the Islamic Prophet: it addresses an individual "messenger of God," whom a number of verses call Muhammad (e.g., 3:144), and speaks of a pilgrimage sanctuary that is associated with the "valley of Mecca" and the Kaʿbah (e.g., 2:124–129, 5:97, 48:24–25). Certain verses assume that Muhammad and his followers dwell at a settlement called al-madīnah ("the town") or Yathrib (e.g., 33:13, 60) after having previously been ousted by their unbelieving foes, presumably from the Meccan sanctuary (e.g., 2:191). Other passages mention military encounters between Muhammad’s followers and the unbelievers. These are sometimes linked with place-names, such as the passing reference to a victory at a place called Badr at 3:123. However, the text provides no dates for any of the historical events it alludes to, and almost none of the Qurʾānic messenger’s contemporaries are mentioned by name (a rare exception is at 33:37). Hence, even if one accepts that the Qurʾānic corpus authentically documents the preaching of Muhammad, taken by itself it simply does not provide sufficient information for even a concise biographical sketch.

Most of the biographical information that the Islamic tradition preserves about Muhammad thus occurs outside the Qurʾān, in the so-called sīrah (Arabic: "biography") literature. Arguably the single most important work in the genre is Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq’s (died 767–768) Kitāb al-maghāzī ("Book of [the Prophet’s] Military Expeditions"). However, this work is extant only in later reworkings and abridgements, of which the best known is ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Hishām’s (died 833–834) Sīrat Muḥammad rasūl Allāh ("Life of Muhammad, the Messenger of God"). Ibn Isḥāq’s original book was not his own composition but rather a compilation of autonomous reports about specific events that took place during the life of Muhammad and also prior to it, which Ibn Isḥāq arranged into what he deemed to be their correct chronological order and to which he added his own comments. Each such report is normally introduced by a list of names tracing it through various intermediaries back to its ultimate source, which in many cases is an eyewitness-for example, the Prophet’s wife ʿĀʾishah. Variants of the material compiled by Ibn Isḥāq, as well as further material about events in Muhammad’s life, are preserved in works by other authors, such as Abd al-Razzāq (died 827), al-Wāqidī (died 823), Ibn Saʿd (died 845), and al-Ṭabarī (died 923).

The fact that such biographical narratives about Muhammad are encountered only in texts dating from the 8th or 9th century or even later is bound to raise the problem of how confident one can be in the sīrah literature’s claim to relay accurate historical information. This is not to suggest that there was necessarily an element of deliberate fabrication at work, at least at the level of a compiler like Ibn Isḥāq, who was clearly not inventing stories from scratch. Nonetheless, some accretion of popular legend around a figure as seminal as Muhammad would be entirely expected. At least to historians who are reluctant to admit reports of divine intervention, the problem is reinforced by the miraculous elements of some of the material included in Ibn Isḥāq’s work. Moreover, some of the narratives in question are patently adaptations of biblical motifs designed to present Muhammad as equal or superior to earlier prophetic figures such as Moses and Jesus. For example, before Muhammad’s emigration to Medina he is said to have received an oath of allegiance by twelve inhabitants of the city, an obvious parallel to the Twelve Apostles, and during the digging of a defensive trench around Medina Muhammad is said to have miraculously sated all the workers from a handful of dates, recalling Jesus’ feeding of the multitude. Finally, it is distinctly possible that some reports about events in Muhammad’s life emerged not from historical memory but from exegetical speculation about the historical context of particular verses of the Qurʾān.

By carefully comparing alternative versions of one and the same biographical narrative, scholars have been able to show that a certain number of traditions about Muhammad’s life-for instance, an account of the Prophet’s emigration from Mecca to Medina-were in circulation already by the end of the 7th century. An important collector of such early traditions was ʿUrwah ibn al-Zubayr, a relative of ʿĀʾishah who was probably born in 643–644 and who is plausibly viewed as having had firsthand access to former companions of the Prophet. Moreover, a number of rudimentary details about Muhammad are confirmed by non-Islamic sources dating from the first decades after Muhammad’s traditional date of death. For instance, a Syriac chronicle dating from about 640 mentions a battle between the Romans and "the Arabs of Muhammad," and an Armenian history composed about 660 describes Muhammad as a merchant who preached to the Arabs and thereby triggered the Islamic conquests. Such evidence provides sufficient confirmation of the historical existence of an Arab prophet by the name of Muhammad. Certain tensions with the Islamic narrative of the Prophet’s life remain, however. For example, some of the non-Islamic sources present Muhammad as having still been alive when the Arab conquerors invaded Palestine (634–640), in contrast to the Islamic view that the Prophet had already passed away at this point.

All things considered, there is no compelling reason to suggest that the basic scaffolding of the traditional Islamic account of Muhammad’s life is unhistorical. At the same time, the nature of the sources is not such as to inspire confidence that we possess historically certain knowledge about the Prophet’s life that is as detailed as many earlier scholars tended to assume. Especially the customary chronological framework for Muhammad’s life appears to have been worked out by later transmitters and collectors such as Ibn Isḥāq, rather than being traceable to the earliest layer of Islamic traditions about Muhammad. Thus, statements of the sort that on March 21 of the year 625, Meccan forces entered the oasis of Medina are inherently problematic. The following section will nonetheless provide a concise digest mainly of Ibn Isḥāq’s version of the life of the Prophet. This digest does not aim to separate historical fact from later legend. For instance, unlike many earlier Western accounts, no attempt will be made to remove supernatural elements from the narrative in the interest of transforming it into an account that appears plausible by modern historiographical standards.Napoléon-Joseph-Charles-Paul Bonaparte (born Sept. 9, 1822, Trieste-died March 17, 1891, Rome) youngest son of Jérôme Bonaparte, Napoleon I’s youngest brother, and his second wife, Catherine of Württemberg. In 1852 he was named heir presumptive to the throne of the Second Empire.

After the French Revolution of 1848, he was elected to the National Assembly as a representative of Corsica and assumed the name of Jérôme. Notwithstanding his ostensible opposition to the coup d’etat of 1851 on the establishment of the empire, he was designated successor to the throne, as Prince Napoléon-Jérôme, if Napoleon III should die childless. Associating mainly with men of progressive ideas, he represented at court liberal opinion against the empress Eugénie.

In 1854 he took part in the Crimean campaign as general of a division. (About this time he became known as "Plon Plon," supposedly because soldiers who fought under his command thought him a coward and nicknamed him "Plomb-plomb" or "Craint-plomb," meaning "Fear-lead.") Returning to France, he undertook the direction of the national exhibition for the international exhibition of 1855. In 1858 he was appointed minister for the colonies and Algeria. He found his political activity was diverted into a different channel by his sudden marriage in 1859 to the princess Maria Clotilde of Savoy, daughter of Victor Emmanuel II, the king of Sardinia. When the war for the liberation of Italy broke out, Prince Napoléon-Jérôme commanded the French corps that occupied Tuscany.

In the last years of the Second Empire Prince Napoléon-Jérôme lost all his official dignities as the result of several indiscreet speeches. After the fall of the empire he lived in comparative retirement until, in 1879, the death of Napoleon III’s son made him direct heir to the Napoleonic succession. As the Bonapartist pretender he was unfortunate and inglorious, and before his death he was virtually deposed in favour of his elder son, Napoléon-Victor-Jérôme (1862–1926). The latter became the recognized Bonapartist pretender on his father’s death in 1891.Nathan Yalin-Mor,  (born June 28, 1913, Grodno, Russia [now Hrodna, Belarus]-died February 18, 1980, Tel Aviv, Israel), Israeli journalist and political figure best known as a leader of the Stern Gang, a Zionist terrorist organization.

Yalin-Mor was one of the three leaders who succeeded Abraham Stern at the head of the Stern Gang during the period of the British mandate in Palestine. The group was responsible for attacks on British forces. Shortly before Israel achieved full independence, Yalin-Mor was arrested and charged with the murder (1948) of UN mediator Count Folke Bernadotte. Although Yalin-Mor was acquitted of murder, he was convicted of engaging in underground activities and sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. However, he was released from jail under an amnesty, and he served a term in the Israeli Knesset (parliament). Switching political orientation, he became a member of left-wing organizations, advocating a conciliatory line in Arab-Israeli relations. Yalin-Mor took a pro-Soviet stance on several international issues.Nevil Shute (born January 17, 1899, Ealing, Middlesex, England-died January 12, 1960, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia) English-born novelist who showed a special talent for weaving his technical knowledge of engineering into the texture of his fictional narrative. His most famous work, On the Beach (1957), which he wrote while living in Australia, reflected his pessimism for humanity in the atomic age.

Shute was educated at Shrewsbury, served in the British army late in World War I, and then completed his education at the University of Oxford. He became an aeronautical engineer, a job he combined with his career as a novelist until the late 1930s. Following World War II, he left England and settled in Australia with his wife and daughters.

Marazan (1926) was the first of 25 books Shute wrote in a career that spanned 30 years. His major works include So Disdained (1928) and What Happened to the Corbetts (1939), a foretaste of World War II’s bombing of civilians. His later novels-all set in Australia-reflected a growing feeling of despair about the future. A Town Like Alice (1950) dealt with the Pacific theatre of World War II.

In On the Beach Shute describes the effect of an atomic war and vividly pictures the complete destruction of humanity. It was adapted as a 1959 film of the same title directed by Stanley Kramer and starring Gregory Peck and Ava Gardner.Nigel Hawthorne (born April 5, 1929, Coventry, West Midlands, England-died December 26, 2001, Baldock, Hertfordshire) British actor, perhaps best known for his portrayal of the cunning, manipulative civil servant Sir Humphrey Appleby in the British television series Yes, Minister (1980–83, 1985–86) and Yes, Prime Minister (1986–87).

When Hawthorne was four years old, his family moved to Cape Town, South Africa. There he had a lonely childhood and was often at odds with his domineering father, who dissuaded him from pursuing a career in acting. Hawthorne attended the University of Cape Town, and, despite his father’s opposition, he made his professional stage debut in a 1950 production of The Shop at Sly Corner. The following year he moved to England and appeared on the London stage in You Can’t Take It with You. He had little other success, however, and soon moved back to South Africa, where he performed a number of leading roles. In 1961 he toured in Beyond the Fringe, and the next year he returned to London, where he made his West End debut in Talking to You, and toured as Field Marshal Haig in Oh! What a Lovely War.

In 1977 Hawthorne played Major Flack in the play Privates on Parade, which led to his being cast as Sir Humphrey Appleby, the quintessential civil servant, in the satiric BBC series Yes, Minister and its sequel, Yes, Prime Minister. Hawthorne had been acting for some 30 years before taking the role, which brought him his first real fame as well as four British Academy Television Awards (TV BAFTAs). He went on to stage triumphs in Shadowlands in London (1989) and on Broadway (1990), where he won a Tony Award. He starred in the title role of The Madness of George III (1991) in London, for which he won an Olivier Award. He later starred in the film adaptation, The Madness of King George (1994), and received an Academy Award nomination for the role. Hawthorne was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1987 and was knighted in 1999. Also in 1999 came his final stage role, the title character in the Royal Shakespeare Company’s King Lear. His autobiography, Straight Face, was published posthumously in 2002.Olaf IV Haakonsson,  (born 1370-died  Aug. 3, 1387) king of Denmark (as Olaf III, 1376–87) and of Norway (1380–87). He was the son of Haakon VI and of Margaret (Margrete), daughter of Valdemar IV, king of Denmark.

After Valdemar’s death in 1375, Olaf was elected (1376) king of Denmark and succeeded his father as king of Norway in 1380. The government of Norway was conducted by a state council, but power was largely in the hands of Olaf’s mother, who planned to unite Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. Olaf attained his majority in 1385 but died two years later. Olaf (died 1022, Sweden) king of Sweden (c. 980–1022) whose apparent efforts to impose Christianity were frustrated by the leading non-Christian Swedish chieftains.

The son of King Erik the Victorious and Gunhild, the sister of Bolesław, the Christian king of Poland, Olaf opposed the development of a strong Norwegian state and joined Sweyn I Forkbeard, king of Denmark, and his allies in a victorious war against Norway in 999 or 1000. Olaf subsequently married his illegitimate daughter Holmfrith to the earl Sweyn, one of the Danish viceroys in Norway. Initially opposed to Olaf II Haraldsson, king of Norway, he later made peace with him and married his other illegitimate daughter, Astrid, to the Norwegian ruler. His legitimate daughter, Ingigerth, married Yaroslav I the Wise, grand prince of Kiev.

A Christian, Olaf seems to have been prevented by advocates of the native Norse religion, based at the temple at Uppsala, from personally enforcing conversion. Missionaries from many European countries, however, carried out the work of conversion. He was the first Swedish ruler to issue coins, which were designed by English moneyers. Olaf’s life is described extensively in Icelandic sagas of the 13th century.Otto IV,  (born c. 1175/82-died May 19, 1218, Harzburg Castle, Lower Saxony [Germany]), German king and Holy Roman emperor, candidate of the German anti-Hohenstaufen faction, who, after struggling against two Hohenstaufen kings, was finally deposed.

A member of the Welf dynasty, Otto was a son of Henry the Lion of Brunswick and Matilda, daughter of Henry II of England. Brought up at the court of his uncle Richard I of England, Otto was made earl of York in 1190 and count of Poitou and duke of Aquitaine in 1196. Under both kings Richard and John, English diplomatic and financial help were to be of great assistance to Otto in his struggles with the Hohenstaufens.

When the Hohenstaufen emperor Henry VI died in September 1197, his heir, Frederick II, was an infant. Therefore the German princes favouring the Hohenstaufens elected Frederick’s uncle, Philip of Swabia, as German king in March 1198. The opposing party, led by Archbishop Adolf of Cologne, however, elected Otto in June 1198.

War ensued between the two factions. In 1201 Otto obtained the support of Pope Innocent III after agreeing to the papacy’s territorial claims in central Italy. In 1204, however, some of Otto’s chief supporters in Germany, including Archbishop Adolf, went over to Philip’s side. When, in early 1208, Otto held only the Welf allodial lands (hereditary possessions independent of any higher lord) in Brunswick, even Pope Innocent recognized Philip as king.

When in June 1208 Philip was murdered by a German count to whom he had refused to give one of his daughters in marriage, many of Philip’s former supporters made overtures to Otto, who agreed to a new election. Chosen king at Frankfurt in November 1208, he strengthened his position by his betrothal to Philip’s 10-year-old daughter Beatrix the Elder. The pope recognized Otto again after the king reaffirmed the papacy’s claims in central Italy.

When in August 1209 Innocent received him at Viterbo, Italy, Otto refused to concede to the church all the lands that the papacy had been claiming from the empire. He agreed, however, not to claim suzerainty over Sicily, of which the young Frederick of Hohenstaufen had in 1198 been crowned king as a vassal of the papacy, because the pope’s policy aimed at preventing a reunion of the German and Sicilian crowns. Otto was crowned emperor in Rome on October 4, 1209.

Soon, however, it became evident that Otto did not intend to keep his word. After occupying Tuscany, he invaded the mainland part of Frederick’s kingdom of Sicily. Disregarding his excommunication by Innocent, Otto in November 1210 conquered southern Italy. By the time Apulia had fallen, an assembly of princes at Nürnberg declared him deposed and invited Frederick to take his place.

When Otto returned to Germany in March 1212, in order to retain the support of at least part of the Hohenstaufen faction, he married Philip’s daughter Beatrix, but he lost that support when she died within three weeks of their marriage. Frederick, who arrived in Germany in September 1212, soon prevailed in the southern duchies, but Otto and his supporters held out against him in the lower Rhine district and northeastern Germany. In alliance with his uncle, King John of England, Otto then invaded France, which supported Frederick. Disastrously defeated at the Battle of Bouvines (July 27, 1214), Otto was deserted by nearly all his supporters. He was formally deposed as king in 1215. By the time of his death, three years later, his power was confined again to his Brunswick dominions.…the third selection, point guard Anfernee ("Penny") Hardaway, and future draft picks.
Peter Andreas Hansen  (born Dec. 8, 1795, Tondern, Den.-died  March 28, 1874, Gotha, Ger.) Danish-born German astronomer whose most important work was the improvement of the theories and tables of the orbits of the principal bodies in the solar system.

Hansen became director of the Seeberg Observatory, near Gotha, in 1825, and in 1857 a new observatory was built for him. He worked on theoretical geodesy, optics, and probability theory. His most important books on the theory of the motion of the Moon are the Fundamenta nova investigationis orbitae verae quam Luna perlustrat (1838; "New Foundations of the Investigation of the True Orbit That the Moon Traverses") and the Darlegung der theoretischen Berechnung der in den Mondtafeln angewandten Störungen (1862–64; "Explanation of the Theoretical Calculation of Perturbations Used in Lunar Tables"). The systematic character of Hansen’s methods carried celestial mechanics to a new level of power and precision. The tables based on his theory were printed in Great Britain in 1857 and were used until 1923. From his theory of the Moon, Hansen deduced a value close to that now accepted for the distance between Earth and the Sun. Assisted by the astronomer Christian Olufsen, Hansen in 1853 compiled new tables of the Sun’s positions at various times.April 15, 1968, Oxford), drummer Phil Selway (b. May 23, 1967, Hemingford Grey, Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire), and guitarist-keyboardist Jonny Greenwood (b. November 5, 1971, Oxford).…record was later tied by Phurba Tashi Sherpa (2013) and Kami Rita Sherpa (2017), and the latter broke it in 2018. Apa announced his retirement from high-altitude climbing in 2012, but he stayed active in the Himalayas. In January–April of that year he participated in a 99-day trek through that……birth to a second son, Prince Louis Arthur Charles of Cambridge, on April 23, 2018.
Pyotr Andreyevich, Count Shuvalov,  (born June 15 [June 27, New Style], 1827, St. Petersburg, Russia-died March 10 [March 22], 1889, St. Petersburg), diplomat and political-police director who became one of Alexander II’s advisers and used his extensive power to oppose the enactment of liberal reforms in Russia.

Having entered the Russian army in 1845, Shuvalov served in the Crimean War (1853–56) and began his diplomatic career as a member of the Russian delegation to the Paris peace conference of 1856. The following year he was put in charge of the St. Petersburg police. His success there brought him the post of director of political police in the Ministry of the Interior (1860–61). There he became known as an opponent of the emancipation of the serfs. In 1866 he became chief of staff of the gendarmerie corps and head of the political police, or "3rd section" of the imperial chancery. While serving in this capacity he became a close adviser to Alexander II and used his influence to retard the carrying out of existing reforms and to appoint persons of reactionary views to important positions. Sent to London on a special diplomatic mission in 1873, Shuvalov was appointed ambassador to London in 1874 and served there effectively until 1879, when, because of his involvement in Russia’s diplomatic failure following the Russo-Turkish War (1877–78), he was recalled and forced to retire.…having concluded an agreement with Quintus Labienus, a Roman commander on the side of Caesar’s assassins who had gone over to the Parthians. The successes of the two armies were startling: Labienus took all of Asia Minor, Pacorus all of Syria and Palestine. For nearly two years all the western…R.L. Stine (born October 8, 1943, Columbus, Ohio, U.S.) American novelist who was best known for his horror books for children, including the Goosebumps and Fear Street series.

Stine graduated from the Ohio State University in 1965, having served three years as editor of the campus humour magazine, the Sundial. After teaching junior high school for a year, he went to New York City, where he eventually landed an editorial job with Scholastic Books. He worked there for 16 years on various children’s magazines, notably Bananas, a humour magazine for older age groups. The first of Stine’s more than 40 humour books for children, The Absurdly Silly Encyclopedia & Fly Swatter (1978), was published under the pseudonym Jovial Bob Stine.

His first scary novel, Blind Date, was released in 1986 and launched Stine’s career as a horror writer. His Fear Street series of stories for young teens began with The New Girl (1989), and the Goosebumps series for age 8 to 11 was launched with Welcome to Dead House (1992); the latter series inspired the television program Goosebumps (1995–98). The unpredictability, plot twists, and cliff-hanger endings of his horror writing relied on surprise, avoided the seriously threatening topics of modern urban life, and delivered to kids what Stine termed "a safe scare." Both series were an immediate success.

Stine launched various spin-off series, including Give Yourself Goosebumps (1995), a choose-your-own-scary-adventure line, and The Nightmare Room (2000), which was adapted for television and aired in 2001–02. He also penned a number of series related to Fear Street, including Fear Street Super Chillers (1991), Fear Street Seniors (1998), and Return to Fear Street (2018). In 2008 Stine revived the haunted dummy, a classic Goosebumps character, in the first book of the Goosebumps Horrorland series, titled Revenge of the Living Dummy. Four years later the Goosebumps Most Wanted series debuted.

Stine’s other notable series included Point Horror (1986) and Rotten School (2005). He also wrote numerous short stories, some of which inspired the TV series The Haunting Hour (2010–14). Other works included When Good Ghouls Go Bad (2001; TV movie 2001) and Monsterville: Cabinet of Souls (2016; film 2015). By the second decade of the 21st century, Stine had sold more than 400 million copies of his children’s books. In addition, he penned several novels for adults, including Superstitious (1995), Eye Candy (2004; television series 2015), and Red Rain (2012).

Stine was played by actor Jack Black in the film Goosebumps (2015) and Goosebumps 2 (2018), in which the author’s terrifying characters come to life.Raphael Semmes (born Sept. 27, 1809, Charles County, Md., U.S.-died  Aug. 30, 1877, Mobile, Ala.) American Confederate naval officer whose daring raids in command of the man-of-war "Alabama" interfered with Union merchant shipping during the middle two years of the American Civil War (1861–65).

Appointed a midshipman in the U.S. Navy in 1826, Semmes studied law while awaiting orders and was admitted to the bar in 1834. In the Mexican War (1846–48), he superintended the landing of troops at Veracruz (March 1847) and marched inland to Mexico City with Gen. Winfield Scott.

When Alabama, his home state, seceded from the Union (January 1861), Semmes resigned his commission as commander, and with the outbreak of war in April he received a similar appointment in the Confederate Navy. After capturing 17 Union merchant ships while in command of the packet "Sumter," he was assigned to command the "Alabama," newly built in England. Between 1862 and 1864 he made a series of brilliant and successful cruises, capturing, sinking, or burning 82 Union ships valued at more than $6,000,000. Finally he met the Union ship "Kearsarge" in the English Channel and, after a 90-minute battle, was forced to surrender. After being rescued from the water by an English yacht, he rested in Switzerland and returned to the Confederacy via Mexico.

As a rear admiral, Semmes subsequently helped command the Confederate Navy in the James River. After the war he returned to Mobile to practice law. He also wrote several books on the Mexican and Civil wars.René-Just Haüy,  (born Feb. 28, 1743, Saint-Just-en-Chaussée, France-died  June 1, 1822, Paris), French mineralogist and one of the founders of the science of crystallography.

After studying theology, Haüy became an abbé and for 21 years served as professor at the Collège de Navarre. In 1802 he became professor of mineralogy at the Museum of Natural History in Paris, and in 1809 he was appointed to a similar post at the Sorbonne.

His interest in crystallography resulted, he later reported, from the accidental breaking of a piece of calcite. In examining the fragments he discovered that they cleaved along straight planes that met at constant angles. He broke more pieces of calcite and found that, regardless of the original shape, the broken fragments were consistently rhombohedral. From subsequent experiments he derived a thoroughgoing theory of crystal structure. Fundamental to his theory were the laws of decrement and of constancy of angles, whereby the cleavage forms of crystals were related geometrically to their primary forms or nuclei. Haüy subsequently applied his theory to the classification of minerals. He was also known for his studies of pyroelectricity and piezoelectricity in crystals. His publications include Traité de minéralogie (1801; "Treatise on Mineralogy"), Traité de physique ("Treatise on Physics"), written at Napoleon’s request (1803), and Tableau comparatif ("Comparative Table"), his mineralogical classification (1809).Richard H. Fleming,  (born September 21, 1909, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada-died October 25, 1989, Seattle, Washington, U.S.), Canadian-born American oceanographer who conducted wide-ranging studies in the areas of chemical and biochemical oceanography, ocean currents (particularly those off the Pacific coast of Central America), and naval uses of oceanography.

Fleming joined the Scripps Institution in La Jolla, California, in 1931 and served as assistant director from 1946 to 1950, when he left to become professor of oceanography at the University of Washington.

Fleming measured the amounts of chemical elements in sea water and in marine life. His work on ocean currents included measurement of tidal-current velocities, description of upwelling of seawater, and observations of seasonal variations in currents. He also explored sedimentation in moving and stagnant bodies of water. With H.U. Sverdrup and Martin W. Johnson, Fleming wrote The Oceans (1942).Rita Moreno (born December 11, 1931, Humacao, Puerto Rico) Puerto Rican-born American actress, dancer, and singer who accomplished the rare feat of winning the four major North American entertainment awards (EGOT): Emmy (1977, 1978), Grammy (1972), Oscar (1962), and Tony (1975). She was also the first Hispanic woman to receive an Oscar (Academy Award).

After her parents divorced, Alverio moved (1935) to New York City with her mother, who eventually remarried. She later began using her stepfather’s surname, Moreno. As a youth, she took dance lessons, and she later dubbed voices for American child stars in films released to Spanish-speaking countries. In 1945, at age 13, she made her Broadway debut in Skydrift. Her first big-screen appearance was in So Young, So Bad (1950). She was credited as Rosita Moreno, but soon thereafter she took the first name Rita.

Although Moreno subsequently appeared in several notable films-including the musicals Singin’ in the Rain (1952) and The King and I (1956), playing a starlet and a slave, respectively-her early career was hampered by studios wanting to cast her in stereotypical ethnic roles or as a sexpot. Partly because of professional frustrations-though largely because of a tumultuous relationship with Marlon Brando-she attempted suicide in 1961. That year, however, Moreno received critical acclaim as the fiery and cynical Anita in West Side Story. For her performance-which highlighted her energetic dancing-Moreno won an Academy Award for best supporting actress. (Although she was a singer, her singing voice was dubbed in the movie.) The musical drama was named best picture. Despite the success, Moreno continued to struggle for good roles, and her film work was limited. Later movies included Summer and Smoke (1961), Carnal Knowledge (1971), and Slums of Beverly Hills (1998). In 2021 she appeared in Steven Spielberg’s acclaimed remake of West Side Story, and two years later she joined an all-star cast-that included Jane Fonda, Sally Field, and Lily Tomlin-in 80 for Brady, a comedy about a group of friends whose love for the New England Patriots and star quarterback Tom Brady leads to a raucous Super Bowl weekend.

In 1964 Moreno returned to Broadway, appearing in The Sign in Sidney Brustein’s Window. She continued to occasionally perform on the stage, and in 1975 she won a Tony for her portrayal of Googie Gomez in The Ritz. She reprised the comedic role for the 1976 film adaptation. Her other notable stage work included The Odd Couple (1985–86), a revival of the Neil Simon play but featuring female leads. In 2011 she starred in the critically acclaimed Rita Moreno: Life Without Makeup, which was staged in California and showcased her irrepressible nature.

Moreno also frequently appeared on television. From 1971 to 1977 she starred in the children’s educational series The Electric Company, where she became noted for the catchphrase "Hey, you guys!" In 1972 she received a Grammy for her work on the show’s album. An appearance on The Muppet Show earned her an Emmy in 1977, and with that award she became the second woman and third person to win an EGOT; earlier that year Helen Hayes had accomplished the feat. In 1978 Moreno claimed her second Emmy, for her work on The Rockford Files. She later appeared as a nun/counselor in the prison drama Oz (1997–2003), and she had guest roles in numerous series, including The Golden Girls, Miami Vice, Murphy Brown, and Ugly Betty. Moreno also provided the voice of the title character in the PBS series Where on Earth Is Carmen Sandiego? She later appeared as the matriarch of a Cuban American family in One Day at a Time (2017–20), a remake of Norman Lear’s 1970s sitcom of the same name; the series originally aired on Netflix, but after three seasons it moved to Pop TV for a short run.

Moreno’s other notable awards included the Presidential Medal of Freedom (2004), and in 2015 she was named a recipient of a Kennedy Center Honor. She published an eponymous memoir in 2013. Rita Moreno: Just a Girl Who Decided to Go for It (2021) is a documentary about her life and career.Robert Endre Tarjan,  (born April 30, 1948, Pomona, California, U.S.), computer scientist and cowinner of the 1986 A.M. Turing Award, the highest honour in computer science, for "fundamental achievements in the design and analysis of algorithms and data structures." Tarjan invented or coinvented some of the most efficient known algorithms and data structures for problems over a wide range of applications.

Tarjan earned a bachelor’s degree (1969) in mathematics from the California Institute of Technology and a master’s degree (1971) and doctorate (1972) in computer science from Stanford University. After completing his studies, Tarjan held appointments at Cornell University (1972–73), the University of California, Berkeley (1973–75), Stanford University (1974–80), New York University (l98l–85), and Princeton University (1985– ). Tarjan also worked in industry for Bell Laboratories (1980–89), NEC Research Institute (1989–97), Intertrust Technologies Corporation (1997–2001; 2014– ), and the Hewlett-Packard Company (2002–13).

Tarjan is the author of Data Structures and Network Algorithms (1983) and, with George Polya and Donald R. Woods, Notes on Introductory Combinatorics (1983). Tarjan holds part of two patents for certain types of data compression and data encryption.

Tarjan was awarded the Nevanlinna Prize in Information Science (1983), the U.S. National Academy of Sciences Award for Initiatives in Research (1984), the Association for Computing Machinery Paris Kanellakis Award in Theory and Practice (1999), and the European Academy of Sciences Blaise Pascal Medal in Mathematics and Computer Science (2004). He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1985), the U.S. National Academy of Sciences (1987), the U.S. National Academy of Engineering (1988), the American Association for the Advancement of Science (1990), the American Philosophical Society (1990), the Institute for Combinatorics and its Applications (1991), the Association for Computing Machinery (1994), and the New York Academy of Sciences (1994).

His younger brother, James Tarjan, is a retired chess grandmaster.Robert Livingston Stevens,  (born Oct. 18, 1787, Hoboken, N.J., U.S.-died  April 20, 1856, Hoboken), U.S. engineer and ship designer who invented the widely used inverted-T railroad rail and the railroad spike. He tested the first steamboat to use screw propellers, built by his father, the noted inventor John Stevens. He also assisted his father in the construction of the "Phoenix," on which he served during the steamboat’s historic ocean voyage from New York to Philadelphia in 1809.

Stevens became a prominent figure in naval design. He developed a "false bow" for the steamboat "New Philadelphia," which increased its speed so that it was able to leave Albany, N.Y., in the morning and reach New York City before nightfall. In 1822 he built the ferryboat "Hoboken."

Stevens designed the inverted-T rail in 1830; he found that rails laid on wooden ties, with crushed stone or gravel beneath, provided a roadbed superior to any known before. His rail and roadbed came into universal use in the United States. He also added the pilot, or cowcatcher, to the locomotive and increased the number of drive wheels to eight for better traction. In 1846 Stevens, an ardent yachtsman, designed the "Maria," for 20 years one of the fastest yachts in the world.…appeared with his second wife-Robin Wright (married 1996; divorced 2010)-in She’s So Lovely (1997), for which he was named best actor at the Cannes film festival, and later garnered Oscar nominations for Sweet and Lowdown (1999) and I Am Sam (2001). Another impressive directorial effort came with The Pledge.…Rodolfo Graziani, marquess di Neghelli (born Aug. 11, 1882, Filettino, Italy-died  Jan. 11, 1955, Rome) Italian field marshal, administrator, and adherent of Benito Mussolini.

After service in Eritrea and Libya before World War I and in Macedonia and Tripolitania subsequently, Graziani became commander in chief of Italian forces in Libya (1930–34), governor of Italian Somaliland (1935–36), viceroy of Ethiopia (1936–37), where he used poison gas against local rebels, and honorary governor of Italian East Africa (1938). Again commanding in Libya at the outbreak of World War II, he advanced against Egypt in 1940. Decisively defeated by Sir Archibald (later Earl) Wavell (December 1940–February 1941), he resigned his post. After the Italian armistice of 1943, Graziani became defense minister of Mussolini’s German-backed Italian republic, engaging in antipartisan warfare. Placed on trial after the war, he was sentenced to 19 years’ imprisonment in 1950 but was released the same year, later becoming leader of the Italian neofascist movement.Ron DeSantis (born September 14, 1978, Jacksonville, Florida, U.S.) American Republican politician who serves as governor of Florida (2019– ) and who is a leading figure in the conservative movement. He previously was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives (2013–18).

DeSantis is the eldest of two children born to Karen DeSantis, a nurse, and Ronald Daniel DeSantis, an installer of Nielsen TV-ratings boxes. From a young age, Ron DeSantis was a standout baseball player, earning distinction as both a third baseman and pitcher. In 1991 he helped the Dunedin (Florida) team qualify for the Little League World Series, though they lost in the quarterfinals. DeSantis continued to play baseball when he attended Yale University, where he was captain of the varsity team.

After graduating in 2001 with a history degree, DeSantis briefly worked as a teacher at a prep school before studying law at Harvard University (J.D., 2005). During this time he also joined the U.S. Navy (2004) and became an officer in the Judge Advocate General’s Corps. His service included a stint at the naval base in Guantánamo Bay, site of a notable detention facility. DeSantis was also deployed to Iraq, and while there he was a legal adviser to a Navy SEAL commander. His commendations included a Bronze Star for meritorious service. In 2010 DeSantis left active duty but remained in the U.S. Navy Reserves. That year he also married Casey Black, a TV reporter and local news anchor. The couple have three children.

DeSantis subsequently worked as a federal prosecutor. In 2011 he published Dreams from Our Founding Fathers: First Principles in the Age of Obama, in which he described his brand of conservatism and criticized the policies of Pres. Barack Obama. The following year DeSantis ran for a seat in the House of Representatives and was easily elected to represent District 6 in northeastern Florida. During his tenure, he cofounded (2015) the conservative House Freedom Caucus and became a frequent commentator on Fox News. Backed by the Tea Party, a conservative populist movement, DeSantis announced his bid for the Senate in 2015 but withdrew after incumbent Republican Marco Rubio decided to seek reelection. In 2017 Donald Trump became president, and DeSantis was among his most vocal supporters. That year he supported Trump’s massive tax-reform bill and the unsuccessful effort to replace the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

After receiving Trump’s backing, DeSantis announced in 2018 that he was running for governor of Florida. Although initially considered an underdog, he overcame a bumpy start to easily win the Republican primary. DeSantis subsequently resigned his House seat to focus on the election. A hard-fought contest, it pitted the conservative DeSantis against Democrat Andrew Gillum, a progressive who was attempting to become the state’s first African American governor. At times the race was marked by controversy as DeSantis and his supporters were accused of racism; DeSantis denied the allegations. Aided by Trump’s support, DeSantis narrowly defeated Gillum, 49.6 percent to 49.2 percent.

DeSantis took office in 2019, and he soon made national news with his controversial policies. Notably, after the COVID-19 pandemic began in 2020, he lifted restrictions much earlier than other governors, though he implemented measures to protect the elderly. While many predicted dire consequences, Florida’s death rate (more than 75,000 people) was within the national average, and the state’s economy fared better than many others. DeSantis also expressed concern over alleged voter fraud, and in 2022 Florida established the Office of Election Crimes and Security. Democrats and voting-rights activists worried the agency would be used to suppress minority voting.

DeSantis also garnered attention for policies that stoked the so-called "culture wars." In 2022 he oversaw passage of the Parental Rights in Education act that limited discussion of sexual orientation and gender identity in public schools. Critics nicknamed it the "Don’t Say Gay" bill, and Disney, one of the state’s largest employers, later issued a statement that was critical of the legislation. DeSantis responded by stripping the company of its self-governing status and tax breaks. While his supporters applauded the move, others noted its legal challenges and the potential negative impact on residents, namely higher taxes. He also supported the Individual Freedom Act (commonly called the Stop WOKE Act), which was designed to "protect Floridians from discrimination and woke indoctrination." Its provisions included a ban on the teaching of critical race theory. DeSantis proposed other educational reforms and notably targeted programs that he alleged sought to "impose ideological conformity to try to provoke political activism." In January 2023 he banned Advanced Placement (AP) courses on African American studies, claiming that the content was historically inaccurate and a violation of state law (presumably the Stop WOKE Act); the College Board, which oversees AP content, later amended the curriculum.

In addition, DeSantis was focused on abortion, and in April 2022 he signed legislation that prohibited the procedure after 15 weeks. Two months later the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, and DeSantis subsequently stated that he wanted to "expand pro-life protections." In September he again made headlines after sending two chartered airplanes carrying undocumented immigrants-who had previously been in Texas-to Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts. It was part of a growing Republican effort to transport migrants to Democrat-led sanctuary cities, typically without any advance warning. While some questioned the legality of the Florida flights, many conservatives applauded the move.

With these contentious measures, DeSantis was seen as positioning himself for the 2024 presidential election. However, he first faced reelection as governor in 2022. His main opponent was Charlie Crist, a Republican turned Democrat who had formerly served as Florida’s governor (2007–11). DeSantis easily won the November election. He continued to pursue a conservative agenda, and in February 2023 he published The Courage to Be Free: Florida’s Blueprint for America’s Revival. Three months later DeSantis announced that he was running for president.St. Francis of Assisi (born 1181/82, Assisi, duchy of Spoleto [Italy]-died October 3, 1226, Assisi; canonized July 16, 1228; feast day October 4) founder of the Franciscan orders of the Friars Minor (Ordo Fratrum Minorum), the women’s Order of St. Clare (the Poor Clares), and the lay Third Order. He was also a leader of the movement of evangelical poverty in the early 13th century. His evangelical zeal, consecration to poverty, charity, and personal charisma drew thousands of followers. Francis’s devotion to the human Jesus and his desire to follow Jesus’ example reflected and reinforced important developments in medieval spirituality. The Poverello ("Poor Little Man") is one of the most venerated religious figures in Roman Catholic history, and he and St. Catherine of Siena are the patron saints of Italy. In 1979 Pope John Paul II recognized him as the patron saint of ecology.

Francis was the son of Pietro di Bernardone, a cloth merchant, and the lady Pica, who may have come from France. At Francis’s birth, his father was away on a business trip to France, and his mother had him baptized Giovanni. On his return, however, Pietro changed the infant’s name to Francesco because of either his interest in France or his wife’s background. Francis learned to read and write Latin at the school near the church of San Giorgio, acquired some knowledge of French language and literature, and was especially fond of the Provenƈal culture of the troubadours. He liked to speak French (although he never did so perfectly) and even attempted to sing in the language. His youth was most likely without serious moral lapses, and his exuberant love of life and a general spirit of worldliness made him a recognized leader of the young men of the town.

In 1202 he took part in a war between Assisi and Perugia, was held prisoner for almost a year, and on his release fell seriously ill. After his recovery, he attempted to join the papal forces under Count Gentile against the emperor Frederick II in Apulia in late 1205. On his journey, however, he had a vision or dream that bade him return to Assisi and await the call to a new kind of knighthood. On his return, he dedicated himself to solitude and prayer so that he might know God’s will for him.

Several other episodes contributed to his conversion to the apostolic life: a vision of Christ while Francis prayed in a grotto near Assisi; an experience of poverty during a pilgrimage to Rome, where, in rags, he mingled with the beggars before St. Peter’s Basilica and begged alms; an incident in which he not only gave alms to a leper (he had always felt a deep repugnance for lepers) but also kissed his hand. Among such episodes, the most important, according to his disciple and first biographer, Thomas of Celano, occurred at the ruined chapel of San Damiano outside the gate of Assisi when Francis heard the crucifix above the altar command him: "Go, Francis, and repair my house which, as you see, is well-nigh in ruins." Taking this literally, Francis hurried home, gathered some fine cloth from his father’s shop, and rode off to the nearby town of Foligno, where he sold both cloth and horse. He then tried to give the money to the priest at San Damiano, whose refusal prompted Francis to throw the money out the window. Angered, his father kept him at home and then brought him before the civil authorities. When Francis refused to answer the summons, his father called him before the bishop of Assisi. Before any accusations were made, Francis "without a word peeled off his garments even removing his breeches and restored them to his father." Completely naked, he said: "Until now I have called you my father on earth. But henceforth I can truly say: Our Father who art in heaven." The astonished bishop gave him a cloak, and Francis went off to the woods of Mount Subasio above the city.

Francis renounced worldly goods and family ties to embrace a life of poverty. He repaired the church of San Damiano, refurbished a chapel dedicated to St. Peter the Apostle, and then restored the now-famous little chapel of St. Mary of the Angels (Santa Maria degli Angeli), the Porziuncola, on the plain below Assisi. There, on the feast of St. Matthias, February 24, 1208, he listened at mass to the account of the mission of Christ to the Apostles from the Gospel According to Matthew (10:7, 9–11): "And as you go, preach the message, ‘The kingdom is at hand!’…Take no gold, nor silver, nor money in your belts, no bag for your journey, nor two tunics, nor sandals, nor a staff; for the labourer deserves his food. And whatever town or villa you enter, find out who is worthy in it, and stay with him until you depart." According to Thomas of Celano, this was the decisive moment for Francis, who declared, "This is what I wish; this is what I am seeking. This is what I want to do from the bottom of my heart." He then removed his shoes, discarded his staff, put on a rough tunic, and began to preach repentance.Saint Simon the Apostle,  (flourished 1st century ad-died, Persia or Edessa, Greece?; Western feast day October 28, Eastern feast day June 19), one of the Twelve Apostles. In the Gospels of Mark and Matthew, he bears the epithet Kananaios, or the Cananaean, often wrongly interpreted to mean "from Cana" or "from Canaan." Kananaios is the Greek transliteration of an Aramaic word, qanʾ anaya, meaning "the Zealot," the title given him by Luke in his Gospel and in Acts. It is uncertain whether he was one of the group of Zealots, the Jewish nationalistic party before ad 70. Apparently the titles may have been an attempt to distinguish him from the apostle St. Simon Peter.

Nothing further is known about him from the New Testament. He supposedly preached the Gospel in Egypt and then joined the apostle St. Judas (Thaddaeus) in Persia, where, according to the apocryphal Acts of Simon and Judas, he was martyred by being cut in half with a saw, one of his chief iconographic symbols (another being a book). According to St. Basil the Great, the 4th-century Cappadocian Father, Simon died peacefully at Edessa.…prison, "Doc" Riedenschneider (played by Sam Jaffe) teams with corrupt lawyer "Lon" Emmerich (Louis Calhern) to rob a jewelry store. They recruit several criminal experts to carry out the robbery, but, despite careful planning, things quickly go awry.The family’s fortunes began with Samuel Irving Newhouse (b. May 24, 1895, New York, N.Y., U.S.-d. Aug. 29, 1979, New York City), who was born Solomon Neuhaus and was later known as S.I. Newhouse. He was working as a clerk for Judge Herman Lazarus in Bayonne, N.J., when Lazarus took……met with the Russian ambassador, Sergey Kislyak, during the campaign. Shortly thereafter Sessions recused himself from the Russia inquiry. In May, however, he recommended that FBI Director James Comey, who was overseeing the investigation, be dismissed, stating in a letter to Trump that the FBI leadership needed "a fresh start";…Shōtetsu (born 1381, Oda, Bitchū province [part of Okayama prefecture], Japan-died June 9, 1459, Kyōto) priest-poet who is considered the last truly important tanka poet before the 20th century.

Shōtetsu was born into a middle-rank samurai family in the provinces but was taken by his family to Kyōto when he was a boy. He showed precocious ability at composing tanka.  Probably by his father’s command, he became a Zen priest before he was 20, but he did not abandon tanka poetry. For him, as for the great Noh playwrights, a key term was yūgen, which he used to suggest deeply moving experiences "that cannot be expressed in words." Shōtetsu often privileged expression and feeling over ordinary syntax, producing poems that remain challenging to read.   His poetry is in the tradition of Fujiwara Teika, the great poet and theorist of the 12th and 13th centuries. He had little patience with poets of other schools, as shown in the opening sentence of his Shōtetsu monogatari (c. 1450; Conversations with Shōtetsu), a work of poetic criticism:

Shōtetsu was an extraordinarily prolific poet. He lost more than 20,000 poems when his hermitage was destroyed by a fire, but he managed to write another 11,000 or so, which are preserved in his collection Sōkonshū ("Grass Roots Collection").

A sampling of Shōtetsu’s poems has been translated by Steven D. Carter in Unforgotten Dreams: Poems by the Zen Monk Shōtetsu (1997).…stolen by the rebel chief Sikyonela. Piet Retief, leader of the Voortrekkers, agreed to this, and he and his men completed the task that was asked of them. They also took additional horses, cattle, and guns from Sikyonela and his people to supplement the Voortrekkers’ supplies. Dingane demanded that Retief……throne, but his twin brother Sin-shar-ishkun did not recognize him. The fight between them and their supporters forced the old king to withdraw to Harran, in 632 at the latest, perhaps ruling from there over the western part of the empire until his death in 627. Ashur-etel-ilani governed in Assyria…Sir Osbert Sitwell, 5th Baronet (born Dec. 6, 1892, London, Eng.-died  May 4, 1969, near Florence, Italy) English man of letters who became famous, with his sister Edith and brother Sacheverell, as a tilter at establishment windmills in literature and the arts. His best-known books are his prose memoirs.

Sitwell wrote satirical and serious poetry (The Collected Satires and Poems, 1931; Mrs. Kimber, 1937; Selected Poems, Old and New, 1943; Wrack at Tidesend, 1952; and other volumes); novels, of which the best is Before the Bombardment (1926), a satirical portrayal of the last phase of Victorian society in Scarborough, Yorkshire, just before World War I; short stories; and criticism. His reputation rests, however, on his autobiographical series Left Hand! Right Hand! (1944), The Scarlet Tree (1946), Great Morning! (1947), Laughter in the Next Room (1948), and Noble Essences (1950). In these he created with conscious nostalgia the portrait of a vanished age-childhood at the family seat, Renishaw Hall, near Sheffield, and at Scarborough; school days at Eton College; and service in the Grenadier Guards (1912–19). Especially memorable is the account of his eccentric and dominating father, Sir George Sitwell, whom he succeeded as the 5th baronet in 1943. Queen Mary and Others (1974) was a collection of essays published posthumously.Srong-brtsan-sgam-po (born c. 617, Rgya ma, Tibet-died 650) Tibetan king (crowned 629) who extended his dominion to include Nepal and parts of India and China and whose reign marked the beginning of recorded history in Tibet. He commissioned a court scholar to create the Tibetan written language using an Indo-European model for the script. Because two of his wives, a Nepalese and a Chinese princess, were Buddhists, he is credited by lama historians with introducing Buddhism into Tibet.

To house the famous image of the Gautama Buddha taken to Tibet by his Nepalese bride, he built in Lhasa, the capital, the Tsuglagkhang, or Gtsug-lag-khang (Jokhang), Temple, which remains Tibetan Buddhism’s most sacred place. Stanisław Mikołajczyk (born July 18, 1901, Holsterhausen, now in North Rhine–Westphalia, Ger.-died  Dec. 13, 1966, Washington, D.C.) Polish statesman, who tried to establish a democratic, non-Soviet regime in Poland after World War II.

Coorganizer and leader of the Peasant Party (1931–39) and a member of the Sejm (Diet), Mikołajczyk fled to London after the German invasion of Poland in 1939. He served as minister of the interior of the Polish government in exile and then became deputy prime minister (1941–43) and prime minister (1943–44).

On June 27, 1945, Mikołajczyk returned to Poland and joined the Communist-dominated provisional government as second deputy premier and minister of agriculture and land reform. At the Potsdam Conference, he tried to press the interests of a free Poland, a condition that was agreed upon but ignored. Mikołajczyk’s Peasant Party leaders, as the only organized non-Communist opposition, suffered from repeated intimidation and arrests. When the manipulated election of 1947 foreshadowed a Stalinist takeover, Mikołajczyk fled to England and then to the United States.

Mikołajczyk was the author of The Pattern of Soviet Domination (1948). In 2000 the ashes of Mikołajczyk and his wife were brought to Poland for burial in the city of Poznań.Stephen Curry (born March 14, 1988, Akron, Ohio, U.S.) American professional basketball player who led the Golden State Warriors of the National Basketball Association (NBA) to championships in 2014–15, 2016–17, 2017–18, and 2021–22 and to the best regular-season record in league history (73–9) in 2015–16.

Curry grew up immersed in basketball as the son of 16-year NBA veteran sharpshooter Dell Curry. The younger Curry learned the intricacies of the game from his father. His keen shooting and high "basketball IQ" were not enough to persuade college coaches to overlook his wiry frame and unremarkable 6-foot (1.8-metre) height. He did not receive scholarship offers from major college basketball programs and attended Davidson (North Carolina) College, which had an enrollment of fewer than 2,000 students. He quickly made his mark, however, averaging 21.5 points per game as a freshman to lead all first-year players in the country. Curry became a national sensation during his sophomore season, when he led 10th-seeded Davidson on an improbable run to the Elite Eight of the National Collegiate Athletic Association men’s top-division basketball championship tournament in a performance that featured what would soon be recognized as his signature shot: a three-pointer from well outside the line. His junior season did not feature any such postseason heroics, but his average of 28.6 points per game led the country, and he was named a consensus first-team All-American. He then entered the 2009 NBA draft, in which he was selected by the Warriors with the seventh overall pick.

Curry made an immediate impact with the Warriors, becoming the team’s starting point guard and averaging 17.5 points per game in his first season. A series of ankle sprains led to Curry’s playing just 26 games in the 2011–12 season, and he underwent off-season ligament surgery. He then signed a modest four-year $44 million contract extension that allowed Golden State to surround its budding star with other talented players. Curry led the league in three-pointers made (272) in 2012–13. The following season he repeated that feat (with 261) and earned his first All-Star selection. In 2014–15 he made a then-record 286 three-pointers while leading the Warriors to an NBA-best 67–15 record and was named the league’s Most Valuable Player (MVP). In the following postseason, Curry propelled the Warriors to the franchise’s first title in 40 years over the Cleveland Cavaliers.

Curry led his team to even greater heights in 2015–16, as Golden State bested the 1995–96 Chicago Bulls’ 72–10 regular-season record by one additional victory. He also topped the NBA with an average of 30.1 points per game and shattered his own league standard by making an astounding 402 three-point shots. Curry earned his second consecutive MVP award for his efforts and became the first person to be voted MVP unanimously. However, the Warriors’ historic season ultimately ended in shocking disappointment as the team surrendered a 3–1 NBA finals lead to the Cavaliers.

In 2016–17 Curry led the NBA in three-point field goals made (324) for a fifth straight season as the Warriors again led the NBA in wins (67). Golden State then ran off an unprecedented 12 straight victories to open the postseason and won a third consecutive Western Conference title. The Warriors finally had a postseason loss in game four of the NBA finals, but the team rebounded to defeat the Cavaliers in five games to capture Curry’s second NBA title.

A knee injury limited Curry to 51 games during the 2017–18 regular season, ending his five-year run as the league leader in three-point field goals attempted and made. He returned during the second round of the playoffs to help the Warriors win their fourth consecutive conference championship and third NBA title (in a four-game sweep of the Cavaliers). Curry continued his dazzling play in 2018–19, averaging 27.3 points per game and earning first-team All-NBA honours. In the playoffs, he guided an injury-plagued Warriors team to a fifth straight conference title, the most in a row since the NBA instituted conferences in 1970–71. However, additional injuries and inspired play by the opposing Toronto Raptors led to a six-game Golden State loss in the finals. The Warriors entered the 2019–20 season shorthanded after losing fellow All-Stars Kevin Durant (departure via free agency) and Klay Thompson (season-ending injury during the 2019 finals). Curry himself played in just five games during that campaign after breaking his hand early in the season, which led to the Warriors having a league-worst record. Curry returned to form and had a fantastic 2020–21 season, leading the NBA with 32 points per game, but the team missed the playoffs despite having a winning record. In December 2021 Curry made yet another mark in the NBA history books by scoring his 2,974th career three-pointer, breaking the NBA record for all-time three-point field goals scored. Following another season-ending injury in 2020, Thompson rejoined the team in 2021–22 and helped the Warriors finally return to form, as Golden State won 53 games and qualified for the postseason. There, the team-and Curry-regained their dominance, losing just six games during the NBA playoffs to win a fourth title during Curry’s era, and he was named finals MVP after scoring 31.2 points per game during the six-game series win over the Boston Celtics.Subcomandante Marcos (born June 19, 1957, Tampico, Mexico) Mexican professor who was the leader of the Zapatista National Liberation Army (Ejército Zapatista de Liberación Nacional; EZLN, also called the Zapatistas), which launched a rebellion in 1994 in the state of Chiapas and later functioned as a political movement defending the rights of Mexico’s indigenous peoples. Marcos’s leadership of the EZLN made him an international rebel icon, and he also became a widely read author not only of political writings but also of novels and poetry.

Rafael Guillén Vicente, the man whom Mexican Pres. Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de León declared in 1995 to be Subcomandante Marcos, was the Jesuit-trained son of the owner of a furniture chain in Tampico. After attending school in Tampico and Monterrey, Guillén earned two degrees from the National Autonomous University of Mexico (Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México; UNAM). In 1981 he was one of five students from the university’s department of philosophy and letters to receive a national medal of excellence from Pres. José López Portillo. He taught aesthetics part-time at a working-class school, known as a left-wing activist centre, before resigning in 1984. It is believed that soon afterward Guillén moved to the mountains of Chiapas to work with Mayan peasants.

Subcomandante Marcos made his first appearance on New Year’s Day, 1994, when he led an EZLN offensive in which the Zapatistas seized several towns in southern Chiapas state. As the rebellion continued, Marcos, one of the EZLN’s few non-Indian fighters, became known for his trademark black mask and pipe and for his communiqués, issued in the name of the Revolutionary Indigenous Clandestine Committee of the General Command of the EZLN. These letters to the Mexican people, which appeared in newspapers and on the Internet, often combined humour, poetry, and storytelling with sharp political critiques.

On February 9, 1995, President Zedillo ordered thousands of Mexican troops into the areas held by the EZLN. The stated purpose of the crackdown was to prevent further violence by capturing Zapatista leaders, in particular Marcos. As part of the effort, Zedillo identified Marcos as Guillén. Calling him a middle-class "maverick philosopher and university professor," Zedillo attempted to discredit Marcos as the voice of the peasant-led EZLN and to strip him of the charismatic guerrilla mystique that had captured the imagination of many. Pictures of Guillén juxtaposed with those of the masked Marcos appeared worldwide. Meanwhile, as Marcos, the EZLN, and the population of many villages fled into the Lacandón jungle, more than 100,000 demonstrators in Mexico City and elsewhere answered Zedillo by proclaiming, "We are all Marcos." While Zedillo proclaimed Marcos a terrorist, the UNAM awarded him an honorary degree.

By mid-March 1995 the troops had been pulled out of the area. Marcos continued to communicate via the Internet from the rainforest. In October he emerged to participate in peace talks with the Mexican government in San Andrés Larrainzar, doing so with his usual dramatic flair-on horseback with armed, masked Zapatistas to the sounds of conch shells blowing and a cheering crowd of peasants. Talks between the EZLN and the government continued into February 1996, when both parties signed what became known as the San Andrés Accords, which outlined a program of land reform, indigenous autonomy, and cultural rights. In December of that year, however, President Zedillo rejected the accords.

As clashes continued in Chiapas between Zapatistas and paramilitary forces in the 1990s, Marcos began to appear at political events and rallies, where he spoke on topics including human rights, international politics, and the Mayan peasant culture. His mantras against neoliberalism (policies promoting free-market trade) and globalization were popular with the world’s leftist groups.

In 2001 Marcos emerged from the jungle for the first time in years to lead a 15-day march from Chiapas to Mexico City. The feat, which became known as "Zapatour," was meant to advocate political rights for the country’s indigenous population. In Mexico City he spoke in the main city plaza, the Zócalo, before hundreds of thousands of people, including several prominent politicians and celebrities. Immediately afterward he appeared before members of Congress to lobby for the implementation of the San Andrés Accords. On April 25, Congress approved a revised version of the accords, which the Zapatistas denounced.

Marcos appeared again on January 1, 2006, this time under his new name, Delegate Zero, to embark on an EZLN initiative known as "The Other Campaign," in which he led the Zapatistas on a six-month countrywide tour coinciding with the 2006 Mexican presidential race. Delegate Zero aimed to form a movement among other indigenous and resistance groups in the country and to create change outside the scope of electoral politics. On the road, Delegate Zero verbally criticized the presidential candidates of Mexico’s major political parties. After the election, Marcos sporadically emerged from hiding to make statements.

Marcos has never officially confirmed or denied being Guillén. Works published under Marcos’s name include The Other Campaign (2008), ¡Ya Basta! Ten Years of the Zapatista Uprising (2004), Our Word Is Our Weapon (2003), and Questions and Swords: Folktales of the Zapatista Revolution (2001), among other publications.Susan B. Anthony,  (born February 15, 1820, Adams, Massachusetts, U.S.-died March 13, 1906, Rochester, New York), American activist who was a pioneer crusader for the women’s suffrage movement in the United States and was president (1892–1900) of the National Woman Suffrage Association. Her work helped pave the way for the Nineteenth Amendment (1920) to the Constitution, giving women the right to vote.

Anthony was reared in the Quaker tradition in a home pervaded by a tone of independence and moral zeal. She was a precocious child and learned to read and write at the age of three. After the family moved from Massachusetts to Battensville, New York, in 1826, she attended a district school, then a school set up by her father, and finally a boarding school near Philadelphia. In 1839 she took a position in a Quaker seminary in New Rochelle, New York. From 1846 to 1849 she taught at a female academy in upstate New York.

Anthony subsequently settled in her family home, now near Rochester, New York. There she met many leading abolitionists, including Frederick Douglass, Parker Pillsbury, Wendell Phillips, William Henry Channing, and William Lloyd Garrison. Soon the temperance movement enlisted her sympathy and then, after meeting Amelia Bloomer and through her Elizabeth Cady Stanton, so did that of women’s suffrage.

The rebuff of Anthony’s attempt to speak at a temperance meeting in Albany in 1852 prompted her to organize the Woman’s New York State Temperance Society, of which Stanton became president, and pushed Anthony farther in the direction of women’s rights advocacy. In a short time she became known as one of the cause’s most zealous, serious advocates, a dogged and tireless worker whose personality contrasted sharply with that of her friend and coworker Stanton. She was also a prime target of public and newspaper abuse. While campaigning for a liberalization of New York’s laws regarding married women’s property rights, an end attained in 1860, Anthony served from 1856 as chief New York agent of Garrison’s American Anti-Slavery Society. During the early phase of the Civil War she helped organize the Women’s National Loyal League, which urged the case for emancipation. After the war she campaigned unsuccessfully to have the language of the Fourteenth Amendment altered to allow for woman as well as African American suffrage, and in 1866 she became corresponding secretary of the newly formed American Equal Rights Association. Her exhausting speaking and organizing tour of Kansas in 1867 failed to win passage of a state enfranchisement law.

In 1868 Anthony became publisher, and Stanton editor, of a new periodical, The Revolution, originally financed by the eccentric George Francis Train. The same year, she represented the Working Women’s Association of New York, which she had recently organized, at the National Labor Union convention. In January 1869 she organized a women’s suffrage convention in Washington, D.C., and in May she and Stanton formed the National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA). A portion of the organization deserted later in the year to join Lucy Stone’s more conservative American Woman Suffrage Association, but the NWSA remained a large and powerful group, and Anthony continued to serve as its principal leader and spokeswoman.

In 1870 she relinquished her position at The Revolution and embarked on a series of lecture tours to pay off the paper’s accumulated debts. As a test of the legality of the suffrage provision of the Fourteenth Amendment, she cast a vote in the 1872 presidential election in Rochester, New York. She was arrested, convicted (the judge’s directed verdict of guilty had been written before the trial began, and she called the proceedings "the greatest judicial outrage history has ever recorded"), and fined, and although she refused to pay the fine, the case was carried no farther. She traveled constantly, often with Stanton, in support of efforts in various states to win the franchise for women: California in 1871, Michigan in 1874, Colorado in 1877, and elsewhere. In 1890, after lengthy discussions, the rival suffrage associations were merged into the National American Woman Suffrage Association, and after Stanton resigned in 1892, Anthony became president. Her principal lieutenant in later years was Carrie Chapman Catt.

By the 1890s Anthony had largely outlived the abuse and sarcasm that had attended her early efforts, and she emerged as a national heroine. Her visits to the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893 and to the Lewis and Clark Exposition in Portland, Oregon, in 1905 were warmly received, as were her trips to London in 1899 and Berlin in 1904 as head of the U.S. delegation to the International Council of Women (which she helped found in 1888). In 1900, at age 80, she retired from the presidency of the National American Woman Suffrage Association, passing it on to Catt. Anthony died in 1906, 14 years before the Nineteenth Amendment was passed.

Principal among Anthony’s written works are the first four volumes of the six-volume History of Woman Suffrage, written with Stanton and Matilda J. Gage. Various of her writings are collected in The Elizabeth Cady Stanton–Susan B. Anthony Reader (1992), edited by Ellen Carol DuBois, and The Selected Papers of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony (1997), edited by Ann D. Gordon. With the issue of a new dollar coin in 1979, Anthony became the first woman to be depicted on United States currency, although the honour was somewhat mitigated by popular rejection of the coin because its size was so similar to that of the 25-cent coin.

The opening in 2010 of the Susan B. Anthony Birthplace Museum in Adams, Massachusetts, on the occasion of the 190th anniversary of Anthony’s birth, stirred controversy when the owner of the property and president of the museum led with an exhibit presenting Anthony as an antiabortion feminist in 21st-century terms. Further controversy followed in 2020 when U.S. Pres. Donald Trump pardoned Anthony for her 1872 conviction. The move was criticized by historians and others who argued that Anthony did not believe she had committed a crime and that the pardon validated the trial.Susan Wojcicki,  (born July 5, 1968, Santa Clara, California, U.S.), American tech industry executive who was CEO (2014– ) of the video-sharing Web site YouTube. She previously was the senior vice president in charge of marketing at YouTube’s parent company, Google Inc.

Wojcicki’s father was a physics professor at Stanford University, and her mother was a teacher. She grew up in the Stanford, California, area and later studied history and literature at Harvard University (A.B., 1990), economics at the University of California, Santa Cruz (M.S., 1993), and business at the University of California, Los Angeles (M.B.A., 1998). After returning to Silicon Valley in 1998, she rented out garage space in her Menlo Park home to the newly incorporated Google Inc., which briefly used it as the company’s first headquarters office.

Google had moved to more conventional office space  by the time Wojcicki went to work for the company in 1999. She had previously been employed by Intel Corporation, Bain & Co., and R.B. Webber & Co. Her task as Google’s first marketing manager was to find ways of generating revenue from the company’s signature search engine. Her first big success came in 2000, with the debut of AdWords, the clickable text-only advertisements that appear on Google search pages.

Several of Wojcicki’s subsequent successes at Google came from the purchase and nurturance of start-up companies in the field of Internet advertising. With the launch of the AdSense system and the acquisition of Applied Semantics, both in 2003, Google became a broker of online display advertising. For a fee, the AdSense system placed appropriate advertisements on participating Web sites. When an advertisement was viewed or clicked on and agreed-upon conditions were met, the Web publisher received some of the money that the advertiser had paid to Google. Wojcicki’s responsibilities greatly increased in 2008 with Google’s acquisition of the company DoubleClick. Among other capabilities, the DoubleClick system deployed cookies that tracked preferences of Internet users for the benefit of advertisers. Google kept pace with the rapid proliferation of smartphones when Wojcicki arranged for the purchase of the mobile advertising network AdMob in 2009.

Wojcicki first became involved with video sharing in connection with the launch of Google Video in 2005. The following year she oversaw the purchase of rival YouTube, an equally new venture that was enjoying greater success. The YouTube brand name was retained even after the company became a Google subsidiary. Wojcicki, who was elevated to senior vice president at Google in 2010, moved over to YouTube in 2014 and became the company’s CEO later that year. She thus became head of an operation that claimed to have more than one billion monthly users.

A parent herself, Wojcicki was a strong advocate of paid parental leave. Anne Wojcicki, a leading entrepreneur in the field of personal genomics, is her sister.Susanne K. Langer (born Dec. 20, 1895, New York, N.Y., U.S.-died July 17, 1985, Old Lyme, Conn.) American philosopher and educator who wrote extensively on linguistic analysis and aesthetics.

Langer studied with Alfred North Whitehead at Radcliffe College and, after graduate study at Harvard University and at the University of Vienna, received a Ph.D. (1926) from Harvard. She was a tutor in philosophy from 1927 to 1942, the year of her divorce from the historian William L. Langer, whom she had married in September 1921. She lectured in philosophy at Columbia University from 1945 to 1950, and from 1954 to 1961 (after 1961, emerita) she was a professor of philosophy at Connecticut College.

In her best-known book, Philosophy in a New Key: A Study in the Symbolism of Reason, Rite and Art (1942), she attempted to give art the claim to meaning that science was given through Whitehead’s analysis of symbolic modes. Distinguishing nondiscursive symbols of art from discursive symbols of scientific language in Feeling and Form (1953), she submitted that art, especially music, is a highly articulated form of expression symbolizing direct or intuitive knowledge of life patterns-e.g., feeling, motion, and emotion-which ordinary language is unable to convey. In the three-volume work Mind: An Essay on Human Feeling (1967, 1972, and 1982), Langer attempted to trace the origin and development of the mind.Sylvia Beach,  (born March 14, 1887, Baltimore, Md., U.S.-died Oct. 5, 1962, Paris, France), bookshop operator who became important in the literary life of Paris, particularly in the 1920s, when her shop was a gathering place for expatriate writers and a centre where French authors could pursue their newfound interest in American literature.

Beach was educated mainly at home. In 1901 she accompanied her father, a Presbyterian clergyman, to Paris, where he served an American church. She did volunteer relief work in France during World War I and in 1918–19 served with the American Red Cross in Serbia.

In 1919 Beach opened Shakespeare and Company, a bookshop on the Rue Dupuytren in the St.-Germain-des-Prés quarter of Paris. Operating a lending library from her shop, she specialized in books published in Great Britain and the United States. The large American expatriate community, combined with a growing interest in American literature among the French, soon made her shop a gathering place; among those who frequented it were André Gide, Paul Valéry, Jules Romains, Gertrude Stein, Ernest Hemingway, and F. Scott Fitzgerald.

In 1922 Beach published James Joyce’s monumental Ulysses, segments of which had already been judged obscene in England and the United States and which had been rejected by several established publishers. She worked closely with Joyce in the exceedingly difficult task of reading and correcting proofs and with the French typesetters, who were generally unfamiliar with standard English, much less Joyce’s complex wordplay and portmanteau words. The 1,000-copy first printing was sold exclusively by her shop, and over the next 11 years she sold some 28,000 copies of 14 further printings. She also published Joyce’s Pomes Penyeach (1927) and Samuel Beckett’s Our Exagmination Round His Factification for Incamination of Work in Progress (1929).

Her shop remained a literary mecca until it closed in 1941 during the German occupation of Paris. In 1943 Beach was interned by the Germans for several months. Her memoir, Shakespeare and Company, was published in 1959.Tevfik Fikret,  (born Dec. 24, 1867, Constantinople, Ottoman Empire [now Istanbul, Tur.]-died  Aug. 18, 1915, Constantinople) poet who is considered the founder of the modern school of Turkish poetry.

The son of an Ottoman government official, Tevfik Fikret was educated at Galatasaray Lycée, where he later became principal. As a young writer he became editor of the avant-garde periodical Servet-i Fünun ("The Wealth of Knowledge") in 1896. Together with a group of the most talented young authors of the day, he published Turkish works and translations of European (particularly French) poems and stories until the publication was temporarily censored by the government in 1901, after which it failed to regain its impetus.

In attempting to define a new literature, Tevfik Fikret and his contemporaries often wrote in an obscure style and in language containing many Arabic and Persian words not easily accessible to the average reader. Greatly influenced by the French Symbolist poets, he sought to adapt Turkish poetry to Western themes and verse forms. A lover of freedom, he became outraged at what he considered an oppressive government and finally took a teaching position at Robert College, then a U.S. institution. Afterwards he settled in his home on the Bosphorus, where he devoted the rest of his life to writing poetry and teaching.

Among his most important works are two collections of poems, Rübbab-i Shikeste (1896, 1957; "The Broken Lute") and Haluk’un Defteri (1911, 1957; "Haluk’s Notebook"), the latter dedicated to his son; his famous anti-government polemic Sis ("Mist") appeared in 1902.Thomas Mudge,  (born Sept. 1717, Exeter, Devon, Eng.-died Nov. 14, 1794, Newington Place, Surrey), considered England’s greatest watchmaker, who was the inventor of the lever escapement, the most dependable and widely used device for regulating the movement of the spring-driven watch.

Mudge served as apprentice to the watchmaker George Graham before opening his own a shop a few doors away in Fleet Street in 1750. The quality of Mudge’s work brought him commissions from Ferdinand VI of Spain, the engineer John Smeaton, and other influential persons throughout Europe. He invented the lever escapement about 1755, introducing it on a smaller scale in a watch that he made in 1770 for King George III, then given to Queen Charlotte of England.

In 1771 he retired from business and turned his attention to the improvement of marine timekeepers. He achieved some success by refinement of detail and by somewhat complicating the mechanism but made no basic advance. He sent his first chronometer for trials at the Royal Greenwich Observatory in 1774 and again in 1776–77. During the second trial its performance was so good that it was not equaled by other chronometers at Greenwich for nearly a century, but his son’s attempts to establish a factory to produce his father’s timekeepers ended in failure.Tony O’Reilly,  (born May 7, 1936, Dublin, Ireland), Irish rugby union player and business executive who reached notable heights in both fields. He played 29 Test (international) matches for Ireland and set British Lions (now the British and Irish Lions) records for tries scored while on tour in South Africa (1955) and New Zealand (1959).

O’Reilly played rugby for Old Belvedere and Leicester while a student and made his international debut at age 18 as a centre against France in 1955. That same year he became the youngest-ever player selected for the British Lions and played on the wing at Ellis Park in Johannesburg against South Africa before a then world-record crowd of 95,000, scoring a try in a famous 23–22 Lions victory. He played for the Lions again during their 1959 tour of Australia, New Zealand, and Canada, scoring a record of 22 tries in both Test and non-Test matches on the tour that year, breaking his own record of 16, set in 1955. He also scored a record six tries in total for the Lions in his 10 Test matches. He was recalled to the Irish team to play against England in 1970 after a seven-year absence. He remained involved in rugby as a member of the Irish Rugby Football Union’s Commercial Committee.

O’Reilly graduated from University College, Dublin, in 1958 and received a doctorate in agricultural marketing from the University of Bradford in England in 1980. During the 1960s he headed the Irish Dairy Board, creating the internationally known brand Kerrygold. In 1979 he became president of the Heinz Corporation, and in 1987 he became the first nonfamily member to be chairman of Heinz.

At the turn of the 21st century, O’Reilly was believed to be Ireland’s richest person, with an estimated personal fortune of nearly $2 billion. After leaving Heinz in 1998, he focused on publishing through his chairmanship of Independent News and Media (INM), parent company of many newspapers in Great Britain, Ireland, New Zealand, Australia, and South Africa. He was also chairman of Waterford Wedgwood, a manufacturer of glass and china. O’Reilly’s investments in that company, however, soon contributed to growing financial difficulties. Exacerbating the situation was a failed power struggle to gain control of INM, which led to his ouster in 2009. Six years later he was declared bankrupt by a Bahamian court.

Active in many cultural and charitable organizations, O’Reilly was chairman of the Ireland Funds, a worldwide network of people of Irish ancestry and others dedicated to raising funds to support programs encouraging peace, reconciliation, and constructive change throughout all of Ireland. He established the O’Reilly Foundation in 1998 in order to fund educational projects in Ireland. He was knighted in 2001.Uchida Shungicu,  (born Aug. 7, 1959, Nagasaki, Japan), Japanese singer, dancer, author, and cartoonist known for her titillating manga (Japanese cartoons), which used subversive themes and flouted social propriety to keep her audience engaged.

Shungicu’s father deserted the family when she and a younger sister were in primary school. Sometime later, her mother, a dance teacher and bar hostess, began living with a fellow dance instructor. When Shungicu was forced to sleep with her stepfather, her mother did not interfere. One of Shungicu’s happiest memories from those unhappy days was receiving a ream of rough paper from her fourth-grade teacher after revealing that her dream was to become a manga-ka (cartoonist).

Shungicu dropped out of high school in her second year and found work in a restaurant, a bar, a printshop, and as a domestic. At times she slept under a bridge. Five years later she left Nagasaki for Tokyo with her beloved manga and $7,000 in savings.

Shungicu’s first collection of manga, entitled Shungicu, was an instant hit when it appeared in 1984. Blending sex with what she described as "gag nonsense" that did not offend readers, she won a huge following matched by few others in the crowded field of Japanese manga-kas. One of Shungicu’s most popular works was Minami-kun no kobito ("Minami’s Girlfriend"), a manga portraying an amiable girl, Chiyomi, who suddenly shrinks to the size of a doll but continues to develop normally. From her place inside her friend Minami’s pocket, she accompanies him everywhere he goes. She talks to him from the palm of his hand and sleeps on his pillow beside his head. They fall in love, but she is fatally injured when he is struck by a car and she is thrown to the ground. The romantic fantasy was made into a popular television drama in 1994.

Between 1984 and 1994, Shungicu produced more than 60 books, including three collections of essays. Her manga books include Hen na kudamono ("Strange Fruit"), Maboroshi no futsū shōjo ("The Elusive Ordinary Girl"), and Shīrakansu romansu ("Coelacanth Romance"). In 1994 Shungicu won Japan’s version of the French literary prize Prix des Deux Magots for two best sellers. The first, Fatherfucker, is a titillating yet disturbing autobiographical novel that sold 300,000 copies after its appearance in late 1993. By July 1994 it had gone into 18 printings, and the following year it was made into a film, released under the title The Girl of Silence. Shungicu’s other award-winning novel, Watashitachi wa hanshoku shite iru ("We Are Reproducing"), consists of a series of manga on pregnancy, birth, and bringing up an illegitimate baby.

In 2009 two of Shungicu’s books were adapted for the screen: Kyūketsu shōjo tai shōjo Furanken ("Vampire Girl vs. Frankenstein Girl") and Yami no manimani ("At the Mercy of the Darkness"). She also acted in a number of films, including Kao ("Face"; 2000), Bijita Q ("Visitor Q"; 2001), and Yami no manimani.The Tattvarthadhigama-sutra of Umasvatis, however, is the first systematic work, and Siddhasena (7th century ce) the first great logician. Other important figures are Akalanka (8th century), Manikyanandi, Vadideva, Hemchandra (12th century), Prabhachandra (11th century), and Yasovijaya (17th century).
Vanessa Redgrave (born January 30, 1937, London, England) British actress of stage and screen who received numerous accolades-including an Oscar, two Emmys, a Tony, and a Laurence Olivier Award-for her performances. She was also a longtime political activist, supporting the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Irish Republican Army (IRA).

Called "the greatest actress of our time" by the playwright Tennessee Williams, Redgrave came from a legendary theatrical family. Her father, Sir Michael Redgrave, was one of Britain’s most popular and respected actors, and her mother, Rachel Kempson, was a noted stage actress. Her sister, Lynn, did both stage and film work-most notably in Georgy Girl (1966) and Shine (1996)-and her brother, Corin, was a successful stage director and actor. Redgrave is also the mother of actresses Natasha and Joely Richardson from her marriage in the 1960s to director Tony Richardson.

Redgrave made her professional debut in the play A Touch of the Sun (1957), in which she costarred with her father. She appeared in her first film, Behind the Mask, in 1958 but concentrated mostly on stage work throughout the late ’50s and early ’60s and was a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company in Stratford-upon-Avon during the 1959–60 season. Her film career began in earnest in 1966; within the space of two years, she appeared in four films that established her reputation as an intelligent actress with a commanding presence. The first of her six Academy Award nominations was for Morgan! (1966), her first motion picture in eight years. She then had a role in Michelangelo Antonioni’s Blow-Up (1966), a psychological mystery that became a cult favourite. Redgrave’s unbilled cameo as Anne Boleyn in A Man for All Seasons (1966) and her performance as Guinevere in Camelot (1967) further secured her status as one of the most popular and respected actresses of the era.

In the late 1960s and early ’70s Redgrave showed her mastery of both classical and commercial fare. She received an Oscar nomination for her portrayal of dancer Isadora Duncan in Isadora (1968), and she appeared as Nina in Sidney Lumet’s adaptation of Anton Chekhov’s The Seagull (1968). In 1971 Redgrave took on the role of Andromache in The Trojan Women and received another Oscar nomination for her work as the title character in Mary, Queen of Scots, playing opposite Glenda Jackson’s Queen Elizabeth I. Redgrave also appeared in such popular mainstream vehicles as Murder on the Orient Express (1974) and The Seven-Per-Cent Solution (1976), and she won an Oscar for best supporting actress for her performance as an anti-Nazi crusader in Julia (1977).

During the following two decades, Redgrave eschewed popular fare in favour of smaller films with well-written scripts or classical overtones. Her controversial performance as a Nazi concentration camp victim in the television adaptation of Arthur Miller’s Playing for Time (1980) won her an Emmy Award, though, as a longtime supporter of the Palestine Liberation Organization, she was widely criticized for accepting the role. She received her fifth Oscar nomination for her role in the film adaptation of Henry James’s The Bostonians (1984). Other notable performances included a literary agent in the film Prick Up Your Ears (1987), and for television, Lady Alice More in the remake of A Man for All Seasons (1988), Lady Torrance in Tennessee Williams’s Orpheus Descending (1990), and Blanche Hudson in What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1991), a remake of the Bette Davis–Joan Crawford film, in which Redgrave costarred with her sister, Lynn. She received a sixth Oscar nomination for her work in Howards End (1992).

For many years Redgrave was nearly as well known for her outspoken and controversial political activism as she was for her acting. In addition to supporting the PLO and the Irish Republican Army, she ran unsuccessfully for the British Parliament as a candidate for the Workers’ Revolutionary Party. She produced a number of documentaries that reflect her convictions, including The Fifth War (1978), Occupied Palestine (1980), Can’t They Put Humans First (1991), which she also directed, and Wake Up, World (1993). Her political activities were not without repercussions: she was loudly booed at the 1978 Academy Awards ceremony when, during her acceptance speech, she referred to those who had objected to her nomination because of her support for Palestinian causes as "Zionist hoodlums." Jewish organizations also protested when she was cast as Holocaust survivor Fania Fenelon in Playing for Time. There is little doubt that Redgrave’s political views affected her career, although public resentment waned in the 1990s, when she played character roles in popular films such as Mission: Impossible (1996) and Deep Impact (1998).

Thereafter Redgrave continued to work steadily. In 2003 she won a Tony Award (for best actress in a play) for her performance in Eugene O’Neill’s Long Day’s Journey into Night. Redgrave was cast in a recurring role (2004–09) on the television series Nip/Tuck and subsequently starred onstage in The Year of Magical Thinking, which was adapted from Joan Didion’s memoir of the same name, and Alfred Uhry’s Driving Miss Daisy. The two plays earned her Tony nominations in 2007 and 2011, respectively. As she entered her 70s, she appeared in the film dramas Atonement (2007), an adaptation of the novel by Ian McEwan, and Evening (2007), in which she starred as a woman who remembers a long-lost love as she lies on her deathbed.

In 2010 Redgrave had roles in the romantic comedy Letters to Juliet and the drama The Whistleblower, about the United Nations’ role in a sex-trafficking scandal in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In Anonymous (2011), which advanced the theory that the plays attributed to Shakespeare were written by Edward de Vere, 17th earl of Oxford, Redgrave portrayed Elizabeth I. She then appeared as the strong-willed Volumnia in a 2011 film adaptation of Shakespeare’s Coriolanus and played a cancer victim in the uplifting Song for Marion (2012; U.S. title Unfinished Song). From 2012 she was the narrator of the BBC television series Call the Midwife. She returned to the stage as a Polish Holocaust survivor in the Off-Broadway drama The Revisionist (2013) and evinced the mother of disturbed wrestling fanatic (and multimillionaire) John du Pont in the film Foxcatcher (2014).

Redgrave also appeared in the TV movie The Go-Between (2015), an adaptation of L.P. Hartley’s novel of youthful misunderstanding (1953), and the movie Film Stars Don’t Die in Liverpool (2017), playing the mother of American actress Gloria Grahame. She then portrayed Juliana Bordereau, an elderly recluse living in a Venetian palazzo in The Aspern Papers (2018), a drama based on Henry James’s novelette (1888). Redgrave had previously portrayed Tina, Juliana’s skittish niece, in the 1984 revival of her father’s stage adaptation of the work (1959). In the 2018 film Redgrave’s daughter Joely assumed the role of Tina. Vanessa’s later films included Christoph Waltz’s Georgetown (2019), in which she played a wealthy woman married to a grifter, and the romantic drama Finding You (2021).

Redgrave was created Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1967, and she advanced to Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2022 New Year Honours List.Velimir Vladimirovich Khlebnikov,  (born Oct. 28 [Nov. 9, New Style], 1885, Tundutov, Russia-died  June 28, 1922, Santalovo, Novgorod province), poet who was the founder of Russian Futurism and whose esoteric verses exerted a significant influence on Soviet poetry.

Born into a scientific family, Khlebnikov studied both mathematics and linguistics during his university years. At that time he also began developing ideas for a renovation of poetic language. About 1912 he met the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky, and the two became the centre of the Futurist literary movement, which was directed against the mysticism and narrowness of Symbolism and which regarded art as a social utility.

Khlebnikov, unlike other Futurists, retained a kind of mysticism-of things and words rather than of ideas and symbols. Through his verbal experimentation he devised a "translogical language," creating a "new world of words" in his verse that makes it fresh and invigorating but difficult for the general reader. He was a poet’s poet, influencing others who extended his experimentation into their more accessible verse.

Khlebnikov was a Slavophile who loved Russia and the Russian language; this led him to change his first name from Viktor (of Latin derivation) to Velimir. His popularity began to decline after the Revolution, although his influence persisted, as the works of Mayakovsky, Boris Pasternak, Osip Mandelshtam, and others clearly show. He died in a remote village in the province of Novgorod. After World War II Khlebnikov was attacked by Soviet critics as a "formalist" and "decadent," and his name fell into complete oblivion. Following the death of Joseph Stalin, however, he was rehabilitated. An English translation of his work is available in the Collected Works of Velimer Khlebnikov, 3 vol. (1987–97).Villard De Honnecourt,  (born c. 1225, Picardy, Fr.-died c. 1250), French architect remembered primarily for the sketchbook compiled while he travelled in search of work as a master mason. The book is made up of sketches and writings concerning architectural practices current during the 13th century.

Honnecourt spent most of his life travelling to such places as Rheims, Chartres, Laon, Meaux, and Lausanne. He visited Hungary in 1245, possibly to work there as an architect. His sketches indicate that he was well acquainted with the great churches that were built during his lifetime. Little mention is made of Honnecourt’s own architectural contributions, although he may have been active in the building of Saint-Quentin. In his notes Honnecourt described the work he did on the rose window of Lausanne cathedral.

The architect’s sketchbook was originally devoted entirely to sketches marked by sinuous figures in draped robes. Eventually, Honnecourt compiled a manual that gave precise instructions for executing specific objects with explanatory drawings. In his writings he fused principles passed on from ancient geometry, medieval studio techniques, and contemporary practices. The author includes sections on technical procedures, mechanical devices, suggestions for making human and animal figures, and notes on the buildings and monuments he had seen. He also offers insights into the variety of interests and work of the 13th-century master mason in addition to providing an explanation for the spread of Gothic architecture in Europe. Vin Diesel (born July 18, 1967, Alameda county, California, U.S.) American actor and producer who was best known for his action films, most notably the Fast and Furious series.

Sinclair grew up in New York City with his mother, fraternal twin brother, and African American stepfather, Irving Vincent, a theatre manager who provided him with some of his first stage roles. While still in his teens, he worked as a club bouncer and took the name Vin Diesel. He attended Hunter College but dropped out to pursue an acting career in Los Angeles.

After finding little success in Hollywood-his only notable work was an uncredited role in Awakenings (1990)-Diesel returned to New York in 1995. His mother gave him a copy of Rick Schmidt’s book Feature Filmmaking at Used-Car Prices (1988), which inspired him to make a semiautobiographical short, Multi-Facial (1995), about a biracial actor struggling to get roles. He worked as a telemarketer to raise the money for his first feature film, Strays (1997). Diesel got his big break when director Steven Spielberg, who had seen Multi-Facial, cast him in the award-winning Saving Private Ryan (1998). With his appealing screen presence-shaved head, muscular physique, raspy voice, and rough-hewn charm-Diesel was soon working regularly. He played escaped criminal Richard Riddick in the science-fiction film Pitch Black (2000) and reprised the character in two more films, The Chronicles of Riddick (2004) and Riddick (2013).

The Fast and the Furious (2001) established Diesel in his most-famous role, as the charismatic street racer–thief Dominic Toretto. The over-the-top action film cost $38 million to make but was an unexpected hit, grossing nearly $145 million in the United States. Diesel followed with another action movie, xXx (2002), playing extreme athlete turned secret agent Xander Cage, and the crime drama A Man Apart (2003). He turned to more humorous fare with The Pacifier (2005) and Sidney Lumet’s mob comedy Find Me Guilty (2006).

Diesel skipped appearing in 2 Fast 2 Furious (2003) and had only a cameo in The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006). However, he returned to the franchise, both a star and a producer, for Fast & Furious (2009), Fast Five (2011), Fast & Furious 6 (2013), and Furious 7 (2015). The latter was especially successful, earning more than $1.5 billion to become among the highest-grossing films of all time. The franchise continued to do well with The Fate of the Furious (2017) and F9: The Fast Saga (2021). Diesel also tried his hand at other genres, such as the fantasy thriller The Last Witch Hunter (2015). He then rejoined the xXx series in xXx: Return of Xander Cage (2017) after passing on the 2005 sequel. He took a break from franchise movies with the sci-fi feature Bloodshot (2020).

Behind the cameras, Diesel used his distinctive voice as the title character in the animated The Iron Giant (1999). Later he provided the voice for the treelike superhero Groot in Guardians of the Galaxy (2014), its sequel (2017), Avengers: Infinity War (2018), and Avengers: Endgame (2019).Vinnette Carroll,  (born March 11, 1922, New York, New York, U.S.-died November 5, 2002, Lauderhill, Florida), American playwright, stage director, and actress, the first African American woman to direct on Broadway.

Carroll attended Long Island University (B.A., 1944) and New York University (M.A., 1946). Although she was educated in psychology and for a time worked as a clinical psychologist, she left the field to study for the theatre. She appeared in several student productions at the New School for Social Research (now New School University) and made her professional debut in 1948. She first appeared on Broadway in 1957. In 1962 she won an Obie Award for her role in Errol John’s Moon on a Rainbow Shawl. A strong proponent of arts education, she founded in 1967 the Urban Arts Corps (renamed the Urban Arts Theater in 1980) to foster participation by minority groups in all aspects of the theatrical arts.

She based her first play, Trumpets of the Lord (1963), a musical revue, on the work of poet James Weldon Johnson. The hit gospel revue Don’t Bother Me, I Can’t Cope, conceived by Carroll and with music and lyrics by Micki Grant, opened on Broadway in 1972 with Carroll as director and was nominated for four Tony Awards. Her adaptation of The Gospel According to Matthew, Your Arms Too Short to Box with God (also in collaboration with Grant), opened on Broadway in 1976 and was nominated for four Tonys. As an actress, Carroll appeared in Up the Down Staircase (1967), Alice’s Restaurant (1969), and other films. She also worked in television, and in 1964 she received an Emmy Award for Beyond the Blues.…the early Ming court was Wang Fu, who survived a long period of banishment to the frontier under the first emperor to return as a court calligrapher. He became a key figure in the survival and transmission of Yuan literati style and was the first to single out the masters…Wanli,  (born Sept. 4, 1563, China-died Aug. 18, 1620, Beijing), reign name (nianhao) of the emperor of China from 1572 to 1620, during the latter portion of the Ming dynasty (1368–1644).

The Wanli emperor was a recluse whose apparent inattention to government affairs contributed to the abuses of power by provincial officials and other political figures that came to dominate that era of Chinese history. The violence and corruption among leaders of the northern provinces led to much popular dissatisfaction and unrest, preparing the way for the invasion from the north by the Manchu, who subsequently conquered all of China and established the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12). Wanli’s reign also witnessed some of the earliest Western inroads into China, among them the establishment by the Italian priest Matteo Ricci of missions there.Wes Anderson (born May 1, 1969, Houston, Texas, U.S.) American director and screenwriter known for the distinctive visual aesthetic of his quirky comedies and for his collaboration with screenwriter and actor Owen Wilson.

Anderson and Wilson met while both were students at the University of Texas at Austin, and their working relationship began even prior to Anderson’s 1991 graduation with a degree in philosophy. Together they wrote the script for a short film called Bottle Rocket (1994), which was directed by Anderson and featured performances by Wilson and his brother Luke Wilson. The short film came to the attention of director and producer James L. Brooks, who sponsored a full-length version of the story. Retaining its title and cast, Bottle Rocket (1996) became Anderson’s first feature film.

(Read Martin Scorsese’s Britannica essay on film preservation.)

Anderson and Wilson next wrote Rushmore (1998), which starred Jason Schwartzman as an indefatigable prep-school student and Bill Murray as his wealthy benefactor and sometime foe. Anderson’s third collaboration with Wilson, The Royal Tenenbaums (2001), was a darkly comic exploration of the dysfunctional adulthoods of a family of child prodigies. It was also the most visually ornate of Anderson’s films to that point, featuring the carefully composed shots, richly realized sets, and other stylistic flourishes that had become his hallmark. Its big-name cast included Murray, Gene Hackman, Gwyneth Paltrow, and Anjelica Huston in addition to the Wilson brothers, and it earned Anderson and Wilson an Academy Award nomination for best original screenplay.

Anderson’s next directorial effort, The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou (2004), about a Jacques Cousteau-like adventurer (played by Murray), marked his first screenplay collaboration with writer-director Noah Baumbach. He then directed The Darjeeling Limited (2007), which he cowrote with Schwartzman and actor-screenwriter Roman Coppola. It starred Schwartzman, Owen Wilson, and Adrien Brody as estranged brothers traveling in India by train to visit their mother (Huston) following their father’s death.

Anderson turned to stop-motion animation for Fantastic Mr. Fox (2009), an adaptation of a book by popular children’s author Roald Dahl. The film, which earned an Oscar nomination for best animated feature, was cowritten with Baumbach and featured the voices of Murray, Schwartzman, Owen Wilson, George Clooney, and Meryl Streep. Despite the challenges of the medium, its settings were as detailed and rich as those of any of Anderson’s live-action films.

With Moonrise Kingdom (2012), Anderson presented a gently humorous story of adolescent love set in a small New England town in the 1960s, and its screenplay, cowritten with Coppola, landed him another Oscar nomination. The Grand Budapest Hotel (2014) is a series of conjoined interludes relating to the denizens and employees of the titular caravansary, a sprawling pink monstrosity located in a fictional eastern European country. The film was nominated for an Academy Award for best picture. Anderson earned nods for his work writing and directing the film as well.

Anderson returned to stop-motion animation for Isle of Dogs (2018), in which all canines in the fictional city of Megasaki are exiled to Trash Island. When a 12-year-old boy tries to rescue his beloved pet, Spots, a band of dogs join his quest. An all-star cast that included Murray, Bryan Cranston, and Edward Norton lent its voices to the comedy. Anderson’s next feature film, The French Dispatch (2021), was described as a "love letter to journalism." It follows various stories that will be featured in the last edition of a newspaper’s magazine supplement. Murray, Brody, Huston, Wilson, and Schwartzman were among the Anderson regulars who appeared in the movie.

Anderson’s other projects included the interior design for Bar Luce (2015), a café located in the Fondazione Prada, a cultural institution in Milan. He also curated the exhibition "Spitzmaus Mummy in a Coffin and Other Treasures," with his partner, writer and designer Juman Malouf, at the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna. The show opened in 2018 and showcased an extraordinary number of often-overlooked objects from the museum’s collection., Richard Wagner’s grandson Wieland reduced three-dimensional scenic elements to the barest essentials and then flooded the stage with multiple overlapping projected patterns. In subsequent years additional scenic elements were added to give variety of texture and depth to the flow of light and pattern. Still later, at the…
…1879 by the German agitator Wilhelm Marr to designate the anti-Jewish campaigns underway in central Europe at that time. Nazi anti-Semitism, which culminated in the Holocaust, had a racist dimension in that it targeted Jews because of their supposed biological characteristics-even those who had themselves converted to other religions or…
Sir William Henry Preece,  (born Feb. 15, 1834, Bryn Helen, Caernarvon, Wales-died  Nov. 6, 1913, Penrhos, Caernarvon), Welsh electrical engineer who was a major figure in the development and introduction of wireless telegraphy and the telephone in Great Britain.

His graduate studies at the Royal Institution of Great Britain, London, under Michael Faraday aroused Preece’s interest in applied electricity and telegraphic engineering. For 29 years, from 1870, he was an engineer with the Post Office telegraphic system and contributed many inventions and improvements, including a railroad signaling system that increased railway safety. An early pioneer in wireless telegraphy, he originated his own system in 1892, but his most important contribution in this field was his encouragement of Guglielmo Marconi by obtaining assistance from the Post Office in furthering Marconi’s work. Preece also introduced into Great Britain the first telephones, patented by Alexander Graham Bell. Preece was knighted in 1899.William Murray, 1st earl of Mansfield,  (born March 2, 1705, Scone, Perthshire, Scot.-died  March 20, 1793, London, Eng.), chief justice of the King’s Bench of Great Britain from 1756 to 1788, who made important contributions to commercial law.

William Murray was the son of the 5th Viscount Stormont. Educated at Perth grammar school, Westminster School, and Christ Church, Oxford, Murray was called to the bar at Lincoln’s Inn in 1730. In Scotland he became famous representing the city of Edinburgh when it was threatened with disfranchisement for the hanging of the English captain of the city guard by a mob. Yet his English practice remained scanty until 1737, when his eloquent speech to the House of Commons in support of a merchants’ petition to stop Spanish assaults on their ships placed him in the front rank of his profession. In 1742 he was appointed solicitor general. In 1754 he became attorney general and acted as leader of the House of Commons under the Duke of Newcastle. In 1756 he was appointed chief justice of the King’s Bench and was made Baron Mansfield, becoming Earl of Mansfield in 1776. Because of the limitations on the patent in 1776, he was granted a new patent in 1792, as the Earl of Mansfield of Caen Wood.

As must be the case with any court in central position, politics followed Mansfield to the bench. Three cases reveal his characteristic aloofness from personal or popular prejudices in rendering decisions. After the burning of his house and library in 1780, during anti-Catholic riots, which involved mobs of 50,000 and the invasion of Parliament itself, Mansfield so fairly conducted the treason trial of the leader, Lord George Gordon, that an acquittal resulted. In another case involving the prosecution of the journalist John Wilkes, who had published works that were declared seditious libel by the House of Commons, Mansfield rose above both popular clamour and royal pressure by careful technical work on precedents. His investigations showed that the crown’s case contained legal flaws, and he felt himself forced to discharge an agitator because due process so required. A widespread legendary view that Mansfield abolished slavery in England with one judicial decision, while it took a civil war in the United States, is unfounded. As a property-minded man of commerce, Mansfield sought, with all of his high tactical powers, to avoid any slavery issue. Even his judgment in the so-called Somersett case (1772), involving the slave James Somersett, who was bought in Virginia and attempted to run away after arriving in London, decided only that an escaping slave could not be forcibly removed from England for retributive punishment in a colony.

Mansfield’s permanent stamp upon Anglo-American law lies in commercial law. When he mounted the bench, at the start of the Seven Years’ War that was to fasten Britain’s grasp upon America, India, and international trade, English law was land-centred and landbound in outlook and entrenched in professional tradition. Reform was imperative. Mansfield’s vision and ambition reached beyond the continental model of a special body of rules for commerce and banking. He sought to make the international law of commerce not a separate branch but an integral part of the general law of England, both common law and equity, using the leverage thus gained to pry loose from feudalism whole blocks of other rules that had little or no direct commercial bearing. An important part of this brilliant venture succeeded.

In the area of bills of exchange (drafts), promissory notes, and the then still novel bank check, Mansfield, following standard international practice, shaped the law in sweeping judgments, each typically canvassing the whole relevant situation and its reasons. But Mansfield also established a new area of jurisprudence. Marine insurance, then a new industry, was centred in London and was a weapon of competition and cold war. Mansfield did not build here on models; he created the entire discipline.

He was not always successful. In 1765 he ruled that a merchant’s or banker’s confirmed credit, or promise to accept drafts drawn from abroad, was enforceable "without consideration"-i.e., without any bargained-for return. This decision was viewed as a flat attack on the whole legal doctrine of "consideration," and that doctrine was reaffirmed in its entirety by the House of Lords. He suffered a second defeat in his effort to make documents transferring land interpretable by "plain intention," so that such intention could not be frustrated by technical rules giving unmeant effect to words. His decision in this area was reversed in 1772 (one of only six reversals during his 32 years of active service). But he triumphed in his expansion of the idea that a man should turn back or turn over any value received by mistake or wrongdoing or under other circumstances making it inequitable for him to retain it. The remedy he devised was a fictitious assumption of a "promise" to pay over (in modern times the fiction was discontinued and replaced by the term "restitution").

Three times during his career Mansfield held positions as a member of the Cabinet, entrusting the great seal of his office to a committee, so that he could retain the chief justiceship regardless of changes in administration but still exert political power. In 1783 he declined Cabinet office, preferring to serve as speaker of the House of Lords. He resigned as chief justice in 1788.Xavier Cugat (born Jan. 1, 1900, Barcelona, Spain-died  Oct. 27, 1990, Barcelona) was a bandleader who introduced Latin American dance music to wide audiences in the United States.

Cugat proved a violin prodigy while growing up in Havana, Cuba, earned enough money to finance his family’s move to Brooklyn, N.Y., and accompanied tenor Enrico Caruso on a world tour at the age of 15. In 1927, having failed as a concert soloist, Cugat became a cartoonist for the Los Angeles Times but quit the next year to form a seven-piece dance band, The Gigolos, which quickly became popular. In 1933 Cugat moved his band to the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York City.

Cugat’s bands included violins, maracas, and bongo and conga drums and featured dancers who demonstrated the rumba, the tango, and other Latin-American dances; one of his series of wives was usually his vocalist. During the 1940s Cugat’s band played in nightclubs, on radio, and in films such as You Were Never Lovelier (1942), Two Girls and a Sailor (1944), and Neptune’s Daughter (1949). In the late 1950s Cugat and his fourth wife, singer Abbe Lane, appeared often on television; beginning in 1966 he was accompanied by his fifth and last wife, singer-guitarist Charo.Yelizaveta Alekseyevna Tarakanova (born c. 1745-died Dec. 4 [Dec. 15, New Style], 1775, St. Petersburg, Russia) adventuress and pretender to the Russian throne who claimed to be the daughter of the unmarried empress Elizabeth (reigned 1741–62) and Count Aleksey G. Razumovsky.

She claimed to have been reared in St. Petersburg, but she was probably not Russian, and her origins and real name are unknown. She appeared in various cities of western Europe in the early 1770s and attracted several noble suitors. In 1774 she was convinced by émigré Polish rebels to pretend to the Russian throne. She thereupon claimed that she was Elizabeth’s daughter and also that she was the sister of Y.I. Pugachov (who was then leading a rebellion in southeastern Russia), much to the disquiet of the reigning Russian empress, Catherine II the Great.

Catherine’s erstwhile supporter, Aleksey Grigoryevich Orlov, discovered Tarakanova in Livorno, seduced her, and lured her aboard his ship in the harbour on the promise of marriage. Once aboard Tarakanova was arrested and sent to St. Petersburg, where she was imprisoned by Catherine in the Peter and Paul Fortress. She died there without revealing the secret of her past.Ziya Gökalp,  (born March 23, 1876, Diyarbakır, Ottoman Empire [now in Turkey]-died  Oct. 25, 1924, Constantinople [now Istanbul], Turkey), sociologist, writer, and poet, one of the most important intellectuals and spokesmen of the Turkish nationalist movement.

While Gökalp was a student at the Constantinople Veterinary School, his active membership in a secret revolutionary society led to his imprisonment. After the Young Turk revolution in 1908, he took part in the underground Committee of Union and Progress in Salonika (now Thessaloníki, Greece) and settled there as a philosophy and sociology teacher in a secondary school. He played a major role as an intellectual leader in this organization, which later virtually ruled the country. During that period he contributed to the avant-garde periodicals Genç Kalemler ("The Young Pens") and Yeni Mecmua ("New Magazine"), both vehicles for the dissemination of revolutionary nationalist ideas. In 1912 he was appointed to the chair of sociology at the University of Istanbul.

At first Gökalp espoused the ideas of Pan-Turkism, an ideology that aspired to unite the Turkish-speaking peoples of the world. Later, however, he limited his dream to an ideology that essentially embraced only the Turks of the Ottoman Empire and was concerned with the modernization and Westernization of the Turkish nation. Although he was interested in developing his countrymen’s awareness of Turkish history, customs, and beliefs, he thought that the Turkish nation could adopt many of the ways of Western civilization without destroying its Turkish heritage.

After the 1918 armistice, Gökalp was exiled to Malta with a number of leading Turkish political leaders. Freed in 1921 after the nationalist victory, he returned to Diyarbakır briefly and then went to Ankara, where he worked in a government translation bureau. He was elected a member of the Parliament of the new Turkish republic in 1923 but died soon after.

As a spokesman for Turkish nationalism, Gökalp greatly influenced the politicians and writers of his generation. His best-known works include the verse collection Kızıl Elma (1915; "The Red Apple"). The title poem deals with an ancient Turkish myth in which universal sovereignty, symbolized in the apple, devolves on the Turks.

Other writings are Yeni Hayat (1918; "The New Life"), an anthology of poems; the prose work Türkeşmek, İslamlaşmak, Muasırlaşmak (1918; "Turkification, Islāmization, and Modernization"); fables in prose and poetry, Altın Işık (1923; "The Golden Light"); the prose work Türkcülüğün Esasları (1923 and 1970; Principles of Turkism, 1968); his unfinished Türk Medeniyeti Tarihi ("A History of Turkish Civilization," vol. 1, 1925); and Malta Mektublar (1931; "Maltese Letters"). Some of his essays have been collected and translated into English by Niyazi Berkes in Turkish Nationalism and Western Civilization: Selected Essays of Ziya Gökalp (1959).Battle of Ayacucho,  (Dec. 9, 1824), in the Latin-American wars of independence, revolutionary victory over royalists on the high plateau near Ayacucho, Peru. It freed Peru and ensured the independence of the nascent South American republics from Spain. The revolutionary forces, numbering about 6,000 men-among them Venezuelans, Colombians, Argentines, and Chileans, as well as Peruvians-were under the leadership of Simón Bolívar’s outstanding lieutenant, the Venezuelan Antonio José de Sucre. The Spanish army numbered about 9,000 men and had 10 times as many artillery pieces as their foe. Just before the battle, large numbers of officers and troops crossed over to embrace their friends and brothers in the opposing battle lines.

Sucre opened the attack with a brilliant cavalry charge led by the daring Colombian José María Córdoba, and in a short time the royalist army had been routed, with about 2,000 men killed. The Spanish viceroy and his generals were taken prisoner. The terms of surrender stipulated that all Spanish forces be withdrawn from both Peru and Charcas (Bolivia); the last of them departed from Callao, the port of Lima, in January 1826.Battle of Firoz Shah,  (Dec. 21–22, 1845), conflict between the Sikhs and the British at Firoz Shah, on the Punjab Plain, northern India. It was the first of two decisive battles in the First Sikh War, 1845–46. A British force of about 18,000 men under Sir Hugh Gough attacked a Sikh army of 35,000 under Lal Singh in late afternoon. After a near repulse and a night of peril, the British achieved victory in the morning at a cost of about 2,400 casualties compared with about 8,000 Sikh casualties. Gough was criticized for his costly frontal attacks but went on to win final victory of the war at the Battle of Sobraon on Feb. 10, 1846.…lead the Bloc into the 2015 federal election. Despite rebounding to capture 10 seats, the Bloc still fell two seats short of reattaining official party status in the Canadian Parliament. That situation was dramatically reversed by the results of the 2019 federal election, in which the Bloc, under the leadership…
Gun War,  (1880–81), Southern African war in which the Sotho (also Basuto or Basotho) people of Basutoland (present-day Lesotho) threw off the rule by the Cape Colony. It is one of the few examples in Southern African history of black Africans’ winning a conflict with colonial powers in the 19th century.

From the late 1810s, the Sotho peoples amalgamated into a defensive state under the leadership of Moshoeshoe, particularly after the Boer invasions (the Great Trek) of the mid-1830s. Using the Maloti Mountains as a defensive base, the Sotho were able to extend their rule into the plains of Transorangia to the west and defend their territory from both British and Boer attacks in the 1840s and ’50s. In the 1860s, however, Boer strength overwhelmed the Sotho. To prevent Basutoland’s direct incorporation into the Boer Orange Free State, the Sotho nation was annexed by the British in 1868. It remained a British protectorate until Moshoeshoe’s death in 1870, when power passed to his sons. The next year Basutoland was annexed-without its consent-to the Cape Colony, which was granted self-government shortly thereafter. Basutoland was then subjected to the rule of white magistrates from the Cape Colony, and, as in other areas where the Cape Colony or Natal ruled over black Africans, the Sotho people were forced off their land to work on white-owned farms or mines. The Cape Colony’s government intended to destroy the powers of the Sotho chiefs and revise their traditional laws, and attractive land in Basutoland was earmarked for white occupation. The former independent African mountain kingdom quickly lost much of its most productive land and its political autonomy.

In 1879 the chiefs of southern Basutoland attacked Cape Colony magistrates and took a stand on the issues of self-rule and sovereignty. In retaliation, troops from the Cape Colony were sent into Basutoland. The next year the Cape authorities doubled the already controversial hut tax on the Sotho and tried to enforce the 1879 Disarmament Act, ordering the Sotho to disarm and hand in their guns. These demands split the Sotho into rebels and collaborators, and this led to civil war between the Sotho chiefs, who were already in conflict over the paramountcy. In September 1880 a Cape Colony army attacked Sotho rebels led by Lerotholi and other chiefs. In October the rebels were able to inflict a sound defeat on Cape troops at Qalabani: while fighting from defensive positions in rugged mountainous country and using horses, the Sotho rebels ambushed a column of Cape soldiers, killing or wounding 39 of them.

Unwilling or unable to commit the large number of troops that would have been necessary to destroy the rebel armies, the Cape Colony made peace with the Sotho in April 1881. The Sotho were permitted to retain their arms, though they were to pay an annual tax on each gun. By 1882, however, the Sotho were refusing to register their firearms and thus evaded the tax. That year a Cape army under Gen. Charles Gordon was sent in, but it retired without achieving anything. The Cape Colony, faced with prospects of endless war, gave over responsibility for Basutoland directly to the British government in 1884. Basutoland became a British High Commission Territory, and the powers of the Sotho chiefs were left relatively intact. This change in status is why Basutoland was not included in the surrounding Union of South Africa when it was formed in 1910. Instead, the Sotho nation remained under British oversight until 1966, when it became the independent country of Lesotho.Morocco earthquake of 2023,  severe earthquake that struck near the town of Oukaïmedene in western Morocco on September 8, 2023. More than 2,900 people were killed and 5,500 people injured in the shallow magnitude-6.8 temblor and its aftershocks. The earthquake heavily damaged parts of the ancient section of Marrakech and devastated several remote settlements in the Atlas Mountains. It was felt as far away as Morocco’s largest city, Casablanca, and in Portugal and Algeria.

The magnitude-6.8 earthquake struck at 11:11 pm local time. Its epicenter was located about 45 miles (72 km) southwest of Marrakech, in Morocco’s Al Haouz province. The earthquake’s focus occurred at a depth of only 11.2 miles (18 km) below the surface, according to the United States Geological Survey, which produced stronger shaking at the surface than it would have had it been deeper. The main shock was followed by a magnitude-4.9 aftershock about 20 minutes later.

The earthquake’s epicenter was located within the northwestern portion of the African Plate approximately 342 miles (550 km) south of the boundary between the African and Eurasian tectonic plates (see also plate tectonics: plate boundaries). The African Plate, whose northwestern boundary extends underneath the western Mediterranean Sea, is moving northward about 0.2–0.4 inches (about 4–10 mm) per year; however, at the site of the earthquake, the African Plate is moving in a west-southwesterly direction about 0.1 inch (3.6 mm) per year. Stresses created by this complex compressional and shearing environment have produced a tight cluster of faults underlaying the High Atlas Mountains. Geologists noted that the buildup of compressional stress produced by the subduction of one side of a fault under another generated the earthquake, and rock fracturing along this fault released much of the stress-which forced one side of a reverse fault (that is, a type of thrust fault that dips at an angle greater than 30°) upward with respect to the other. Initial estimates suggest that the upward moving block was raised up to 5.6 feet (1.7 meters) along a 19-mile- (30-km-) long section of the earthquake-producing fault.

Damage in the earthquake zone was extensive, especially in remote mountain villages in Morocco’s Al Haouz province. In this region, nearly all of the houses and other buildings were constructed using unreinforced brick and masonry, and local building standards were either lax or went largely unenforced. In Amizmiz, a town located in the mountains about 20 miles (about 32 km) northeast of the earthquake’s epicenter, the devastation was particularly severe; much of the town was leveled, and emergency workers feared that as many as 2,000 people may have lost their lives under the weight of falling debris and collapsed walls. Some small settlements also endured catastrophic losses; the town of Tafeghaghte, located about 1 mile (1.6 km) from Amizmiz, was also reduced to rubble, the earthquake killing more than 90 of its residents and shattering all but a few of the town’s 100 houses. Since most of the buildings in Marrakech had been constructed according to modern building standards, most of the city suffered little or no damage; however, several walls and other structures in the city’s historic medina district, which dates to the 11th century, either collapsed or were heavily damaged.

The areas hardest hit by the earthquake were located along rugged, hard-to-reach hillsides and valleys in Al Haouz province. Many of the region’s mountain roads, which were largely considered poor quality under normal conditions, were made impassable by boulders and other debris produced by earthquake-driven landslides. These obstacles stymied relief efforts, greatly slowing the movement of rescue teams, emergency services, and heavy equipment. Some five days after the earthquake, survivors in remote villages in need of relief supplies such as tents, food, and water had yet to receive outside help.

In the days following the earthquake, the Moroccan government was criticized for its management of the disaster recovery. Some earthquake survivors grew impatient with the perceived lack of effort by the government to bring in relief supplies or search-and-rescue teams to reach loved ones still trapped in the rubble. The Moroccan government faced additional criticism for its decision to accept disaster recovery assistance only from certain countries. While search-and-rescue teams and relief organizations from Spain, Qatar, Britain, and the United Arab Emirates were allowed to enter the country, those from other countries-including France, Germany, Tunisia, Canada, and the United States-were not. The Moroccan government noted that this decision was made so as to avoid complicating ongoing relief efforts with traffic bottlenecks on the limited road network within the earthquake zone. The government later clarified their position, stating that all aid was welcome, but it needed to enter the country through proper channels to allow for  coordination in the most efficient manner possible.Siege of Drogheda,  (3–11 September 1649). The Royalist rebellion that broke out in Ireland against the new English republic in 1649 was met by a prompt English response. On 15 August Oliver Cromwell and 15,000 troops landed in Dublin. His merciless policy toward the Irish Royalists would become brutally clear within a month.

The defeat of the Irish Royalists at Rathmines in early August was fortuitous for Cromwell, for without it, the English would have held only the small port of Derry (known as Londonderry from 1662) in the north, making his invasion almost impossible to effect. Cromwell quickly found that the Irish Royalists had retreated into fortified towns. He therefore prepared for a series of sieges.

The first occurred at Drogheda, 28 miles (45 km) north of Dublin. Cromwell arrived on September 3 and found the town surrounded by high, thick walls and its governor, Sir Arthur Ashton, was confident of his defenses and refused an order to surrender. On  10 September Cromwell began an artillery bombardment of the walls. These were breached the next day, but the gap created was too small to allow troops to enter the city. Twice they were repelled until Cromwell himself led an assault and overwhelmed the defenders on September 11.

The carnage inside the city was appalling. Cromwell’s troops killed priests and monks on sight and set light to a Catholic church sheltering some soldiers. Civilians as well as soldiers were massacred, and Ashton was bludgeoned to death with his own wooden leg. The few Royalist soldiers who survived were transported to Barbados. What happened at Drogheda was replicated at Wexford the following month and Clonmel the next May. By the time Cromwell had put down the rebellion and returned to England in that same month, he had become forever hated by Irish Catholics.

Losses: English, 150 of 12,000; Irish, 2,800 dead and 200 captured of 3,100.War of Attrition,  inconclusive war (1969–70) chiefly between Egypt and Israel. The conflict, launched by Egypt, was meant to wear down Israel by means of a long engagement and so provide Egypt with the opportunity to dislodge Israeli forces from the Sinai Peninsula, which Israel had seized from Egypt in the Six-Day (June) War of 1967.

Shortly after the end of the 1967 war, Egyptian Pres. Gamal Abdel Nasser made clear his intention to retake by force territory captured by Israel in the conflict. Egyptian losses in the war had been significant, but the support and material investment of the Soviet Union sped Egypt’s recovery. In autumn 1968 Nasser felt adequately prepared to launch limited attacks on Israeli forces in the Suez Canal zone. After an opening period of mutual hostilities, a de facto cease-fire materialized, and, in the subsequent lull, both Egypt and Israel built up their defenses.

In March 1969 Egypt put an end to the cease-fire and initiated renewed attacks against Israel, marking the beginning of the War of Attrition. Although the Egyptian-Israeli front was the main theatre of battle, to a lesser extent an eastern front-which included Jordanian, Syrian, Iraqi, and Palestinian forces-was also a factor in the hostilities. Using heavy artillery, new MiG aircraft, Soviet advisers, and an advanced Soviet-designed surface-to-air missile system, the Egyptians inflicted heavy losses on the Israelis. In mid-July, in light of increasing casualties, Golda Meir-who had become Israel’s prime minister following Levi Eshkol’s sudden death in February 1969-escalated Israeli attacks. By December Israeli forces had destroyed the entirety of the Egyptian air defense system, and from early January 1970 deep-penetration raids were launched against Egyptian targets in the Nile valley and delta. Sufficiently threatened by the Israeli escalation, on January 22, 1970, Nasser secretly traveled to Moscow to appeal directly to the Soviet Union for assistance. The Soviets were hesitant, but, faced with Nasser’s threat to resign and the spectre of his replacement by a pro-Western successor, they acquiesced-agreeing, then, to directly involve themselves in the conflict. Israeli raids were suspended after Soviet pilots began to fly combat patrols over parts of Egypt, and the battle shifted to the canal zone.

Fearing an eventual Israeli confrontation with the Soviet Union, U.S. Pres. Richard Nixon sent Secretary of State William Rogers to intervene with a complex cease-fire proposal, which was accepted by Egypt, Jordan, and Israel in August 1970. This plan specified limits on the deployment of missiles and revived a year-old diplomatic initiative (the Rogers Plan) that insisted on an exchange of territory for peace on all fronts. Negotiations were to be initiated after the cease-fire took effect. The Egyptians and the Soviets violated the agreement almost immediately, however, by moving their missiles closer to the canal. In spite of the cease-fire violation, Israel decided not to resume the conflict, and when Nasser died in September 1970, his successor, Anwar Sadat, did not renew the fighting.

At great economic and human expense, the War of Attrition left its underlying disputes unresolved. No territory was exchanged, and there was no obvious victor; observers differed as to whether either side had achieved a strategic success. For some, Egypt’s failure to make any territorial gains pointed to an Israeli victory; others suggested that the shift in psychological balance that resulted from the war was in Egyptian favour. The lack of resolution led to the renewal of hostilities only years later in the Arab-Israeli war of October 1973. The status of the Sinai Peninsula and the issue of permanent peace between Egypt and Israel were ultimately resolved by the 1979 peace treaty that followed the Camp David Accords.Aa,  the name of many small European rivers. The word is derived from the Old High German aha, cognate to the Latin aqua ("water").

Among the streams of this nature are: a river in northern France flowing through St. Orner and Gravelines and a river of Switzerland, in the cantons of Lucerne and Aargau, which carries the waters of the "finger" lakes of Baldeggersee and Hallwilersee into the Aare. In Germany there are the Westphalian Aa, joining the Werre at Herford, the Münster Aa, a tributary of the Ems, and others. Two rivers in Latvia, the Lielupe and the Gauja, were formerly known as Curlandish and Livonian Aa, respectively.Abkhazia,  autonomous republic in northwestern Georgia that formally declared independence in 1999. Only a few countries-most notably Russia, which maintains a military presence in Abkhazia-recognize its independence. Bordering the eastern shores of the Black Sea, Abkhazia consists of a narrow coastal lowland broken by mountain spurs, followed by a hilly foreland zone of eroded marine and river terraces that merge into the steep slopes of the Caucasus Mountains located to the north. Area 3,336 square miles (8,640 square km). Pop. (2014) 240,705; (2017 est.) 243,564.

The sharp relief in close proximity to the sea gives Abkhazia a wet climate. Near-subtropical conditions prevail in the lowland, where the average January temperature remains above the freezing point and annual rainfall is 47 to 55 inches (1,200 to 1,400 mm). On the mountain slopes, climatic conditions are more severe and precipitation is heavier. Wide areas of the lowland and foreland zones have been cleared of the forests of oak, beech, and hornbeam that once covered Abkhazia.

The majority of the population is concentrated in the coastal lowland, where the larger settlements are located-the capital, Sokhumi, Ochʾamchʾire, and the resort centres of Gagra and Novy Afon. Prior to a separatist rebellion in the early 1990s led by ethnic Abkhaz, ethnic Georgians had made up almost half of Abkhazia’s population, while ethnic Abkhaz had accounted for less than one-fifth; Armenians and Russians made up the remainder. In 1993, however, most Georgians and some Russians and Armenians fled Abkhazia for other parts of Georgia.

Although the amount of arable land is small, agriculture constitutes the predominant economic activity in Abkhazia. In the foreland zone an excellent tobacco is grown. The coastal zone is noted for its tea, silk, and fruits. Oil is extracted from the nut of the tung tree, which is widely grown together with eucalyptus and bamboo. Grapes have been cultivated in the area since ancient times. Inland, on the higher slopes, timber production is the major occupation. Coal mining centres on Tqvarchʾeli, the largest inland city. Power is supplied by several hydroelectric plants. The coastal resorts and Lake Ritsa are popular holiday and convalescent centres. The main line of communication in Abkhazia is the electrified railway along the coast, with a branch to Tqvarchʾeli. Roads also parallel the coast and lead inland.

The Abkhaz were vassals of the Byzantine Empire when they became Christian under Justinian I (c. 550). In the 8th century the independent kingdom of Abkhazia was formed. Later a part of Georgia, it secured its independence in 1463 only to come under the rule of the Ottoman Empire in the 16th century. Islam subsequently replaced Christianity in parts of the region. In 1810 a treaty with Russia was signed acknowledging a protectorate. Russia annexed Abkhazia in 1864, and the Soviet authorities proclaimed its autonomy as a region in 1919 and raised it to the status of a republic in 1921. It became an autonomous republic within the Georgian republic in 1930, and it remained part of Georgia when the latter attained independence in 1991.

In 1992, secessionists in Abkhazia staged an armed revolt against the Georgian central government in a bid to obtain Abkhazian independence. The rebels defeated Georgian forces and established control over Abkhazia in 1993, and in May 1994 a cease-fire was arranged. Despite the cease-fire and the subsequent deployment of a largely Russian peacekeeping force in the region, hostilities continued, and in 1999 the region formally declared its independence, a move that was not recognized by the international community. Georgian accusations of Russian support for separatist ambitions in the region, as well as criticism of the ease with which Abkhazian residents were able to obtain Russian passports (by 2002 more than one-half of the population of Abkhazia had acquired them), served to strain relations between the two countries. The conflict was further aggravated following the 2004 election in Georgia of Pres. Mikheil Saakashvili, who made Georgian territorial unity and control of the country’s separatist regions-Abkhazia among them-a political priority. In 2006 Georgia was able to take control of a portion of Abkhazia’s Kodori Gorge, although the rest of Abkhazia remained outside Georgian control.

In the years that followed, Russia became increasingly influential in Abkhazia. Hostilities erupted in August 2008 in another Georgian separatist region, South Ossetia, as Georgian forces engaged with local separatist fighters as well as with Russian troops who had crossed the border there. Violence spread rapidly to other parts of Georgia, including Abkhazia, where Russia massed additional forces in the days following the initial outbreak of warfare in South Ossetia. Though a French-brokered cease-fire called for the withdrawal of Russian forces, Abkhazia later allowed Russia to take control of its border, railways, and airport and to control and build military bases in the region.

Domestically, the region’s de facto government struggled to maintain a stable representative government. Though about half the population was Georgian, Armenian, or Russian, those ethnic groups remained largely absent from the Abkhaz-dominated government. Georgians in particular remained disenfranchised and were pressured to take on Abkhaz names and identities. Abkhazian Pres. Sergei Bagapsh, an ethnic Abkhaz who married into a Georgian family, sought unsuccessfully to extend citizenship to Georgians in Abkhazia and to come to a settlement with Georgia on an independent Abkhazia. After the hostilities between Georgia and Russia in 2008, he was criticized for handing too many Abkhazian assets to Russia. He remained a focus of much opposition until he died in office from heart failure in 2011.

Bagapsh’s vice president and elected successor, Aleksandr Ankvab, attempted to strengthen the already powerful presidency in light of persistent opposition-and six assassination attempts (before and during his presidency). He resigned in June 2014, days after protesters stormed the presidential palace and forced him to seek refuge in a Russian base.

Raul Khajimba, a former vice president who had led the opposition against Ankvab, was narrowly elected president months later and likewise faced organized efforts to force his resignation. He survived those efforts, however, and sought a second term in an election set originally for July 2019. That election was postponed to August after a key opposition candidate, Aslan Bzhania, fell suddenly ill, allegedly from poisoning. After a close runoff election held on September 8, Khajimba won a plurality of votes and was declared the winner, though neither candidate received 50 percent of the vote. In January 2020 the election was nullified, and Khajimba resigned two days later. When a new election was held in March, Bzhania won a commanding majority of the votes.Adwa,  town, northern Ethiopia. Adwa lies on the east-west highway between Aksum and Adi Grat at its junction with the road north to Asmara (Asmera), in Eritrea. Adwa is a market centre (grains, honey, hides, coffee) for the Tigray people. The town is located 10 miles (16 km) west of an area of fantastic volcanic formations. On March 1, 1896, Emperor Menilek II defeated an Italian force there. Nearby are the ruins of Fremona, headquarters for the Portuguese Jesuits who came to Ethiopia in the 16th and 17th centuries. Pop. (2007 prelim.) 40,502.Of the Ak-Saray, Timur’s palace built between 1390 and 1405 at Kesh, only the monumental gates remain, again with coloured-tile decoration.Aksu River,  river formed near Aksu town in the Uygur Autonomous Region of Xinjiang, China, by headstreams rising in the Tien (Tian) Shan ("Heavenly Mountains"). It flows about 60 miles (100 km) southeastward to form (with the Yarkand and other rivers) the Tarim River.Al-Ḥākim (c. 1002–03)-were designed in the traditional hypostyle plan with axial cupolas. It is only in such architectural details as the elaborately composed facade of Al-Ḥākim, with its corner towers and vaulted portal, that innovations appear, for most earlier mosques did not have large formal……of the stony plains is Al-Ḥamād, which stretches from Al-Nafūd northward into the Syrian Desert. Chert plains were formed on the surface during the Oligocene in the Al-Ḥamād and in the Al-Malsūniyyah region east of the Khurayṣ oil field. The gravel plains resulted from deposits left during the Pleistocene Epoch…Aldebaran, (Arabic: "The Follower")  reddish giant star in the constellation Taurus. Aldebaran is one of the 15 brightest stars, with an apparent visual magnitude of 0.85. Its diameter is 44 times that of the Sun. It is accompanied by a very faint (13th magnitude) red companion star. Aldebaran lies 65 light-years from Earth. The star was once thought to be a member of the Hyades cluster, but in fact Aldebaran is 85 light-years closer to Earth. Aldebaran was probably named "The Follower" because it rises after the Pleiades cluster of stars.…late work is the simple Altieri Chapel in San Francesco a Ripa (c. 1674) in Rome. The relatively deep space above the altar reveals a statue representing the death of the Blessed Ludovica Albertoni. Bernini consciously separated architecture, sculpture, and painting for different roles, reversing the process that culminated in…Amphipolis,  ancient Greek city on the Strymon (Strimón) River about three miles from the Aegean Sea, in Macedonia. A strategic transportation centre, it controlled the bridge over the Strymon and the route from northern Greece to the Hellespont, including the western approach to the timber, gold, and silver of Mount Pangaeum in Thrace. Originally a Thracian town (Ennea Hodoi, "Nine Roads"), it was colonized by Athens in 437–436 bc. The Spartan Brasidas seized it in 424 and defeated the Athenian Cleon, who tried to recapture it in 422. It was officially returned to Athens by the Peace of Nicias (421) but actually remained independent, despite Athenian attempts to regain control (416 and 368–365). Philip II of Macedonia occupied it in 357, and it remained under Macedonian control until 168, when Rome made it a free city and also the headquarters of the Roman governor of Macedonia. Traces of ancient fortifications and a Roman aqueduct are on the city’s site, which is occupied by the modern town of Amfípolis. An-p’ing,  seaport and former town, now a city district (ch’ü, or qu) of T’ai-nan special municipality, southwestern Taiwan. Situated on the Taiwan Strait, it is the traditional port for T’ai-nan.

An-p’ing is the oldest Chinese settlement in southern Taiwan, dating from the late 16th century. It is connected to central T’ai-nan by canal and by light railway. Until the late 19th century, An-p’ing was a busy port, with strong commercial connections with Fuzhou and Xiamen (Amoy) and other ports on the Chinese mainland. The harbour, however, was always shallow and subject to silting, and by the early 1970s it was largely reduced to use as a fishing harbour. The growth of nearby Kao-hsiung (Gaoxiung) to the south and the construction of the railway system, giving T’ai-nan access both to Kao-hsiung and to Chi-lung (Jilong, or Keelung) at the northern end of Taiwan, led to An-p’ing’s rapid decline as a commercial port. Pop. (2015 est.), 65,380.…towers of a Roman fort, Anderida (c. 250 ce), rank among the best extant examples of Roman building in England. After the Norman Conquest (1066) a castle was built within the Roman walls. Pop. (2001) 2,997; (2011) 3,153.Andorra,  small, landlocked, independent European coprincipality situated among the southern peaks of the Pyrenees Mountains and bounded by France to the north and east and by Spain to the south and west. It is one of the smallest states in Europe. The capital is Andorra la Vella.

Andorra consists of a cluster of mountain valleys whose streams unite to form the Valira River. Two of these streams, the Madriu and the Perafita, flow into the Madriu-Perafita-Claror valley, which occupies about one-tenth of Andorra’s land area and is characterized by glacial landscapes, steep valleys, and open pastures. The valley was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2004.

Andorra has traditionally had a strong affinity with the region of Catalonia in northern Spain. Andorra’s official language is Catalan (Spanish and French are also spoken); its institutions are based in Catalonian law, and a large proportion of the Spanish immigrants (or their descendants) in Andorra are Catalan. Most Andorrans are Roman Catholic; Andorra is part of the diocese of Urgel. Almost nine-tenths of the population is classified as urban, and half of residents are foreign nationals, mainly from Spain, France, and Portugal.

With only a tiny proportion of Andorra’s land cultivable, the traditional economy centred on the pasturing of sheep and the harvesting of modest quantities of tobacco, rye, wheat, olives, grapes, and potatoes. Industry was limited to processing these products and to handicrafts. Because of the lack of customs duties and low or nonexistent taxes, Andorra has become an important international centre of retail trade that has attracted millions of shoppers from all over Europe with its duty-free imported consumer goods, including alcoholic beverages, electronic devices, tobacco, and clothing. Tourism is another of Andorra’s leading industries, and the area has excellent opportunities for winter sports. The construction industry flourished in response to the increase in tourism. The banking sector is also economically significant.

Although not a member of the European Union, Andorra has used the euro as its de facto primary currency since 2002. In July 2011 Andorra concluded a monetary agreement with the EU that made the euro its official currency, although the Andorran government was not granted the power to issue its own euro banknotes. No railway system exists, but good roads link Andorra with France and Spain, and the principality is served by a small airport in Seo de Urgel, Spain. The University of Andorra was established in 1997; it has faculties in nursing, computer studies, and virtual studies and continuing education. Virtually all Andorrans are literate.

Historically, the coprinces (the French president and the bishop of Urgel) represented Andorra internationally and jointly headed the government through their delegates. The elected members of Andorra’s unicameral legislature, the 28-member General Council of the Valleys, were responsible for internal administration and functioned as both an informal legislature and a cabinet headed by a prime minister. The 1993 constitution, approved by Andorran voters in a referendum, changed this structure and transferred most of the powers of the coprinces to the General Council, which became a true national parliament elected by universal suffrage. Every four years, the General Council elects an Executive Council president who heads the government and who then chooses cabinet members.

The government was newly empowered to raise revenues through taxation, to create an independent judiciary, to give citizens the right to form political parties and trade unions, and to control its foreign policy and join international organizations. The coprinces remained the constitutional heads of state, though this role was largely ceremonial. In the early 21st century the main political parties were the centre-right Democrats for Andorra, the Social Democratic Party, and the Lauredian Union.

Andorra’s independence is traditionally ascribed to Charlemagne, who recovered the region from the Muslims in 803, and to his son Louis I (the Pious), who granted the inhabitants a charter of liberties. Charlemagne’s grandson, Charles II, granted Andorra to the counts of Urgel, from whom it passed to the bishops of Urgel. Andorra’s dual allegiance to two princes, one in Spain and one in France, originated in the late 13th century in a proprietary quarrel between the Spanish bishops of Urgel and the French heirs to the countship of Urgel. Andorra was subsequently governed jointly by representatives of the Spanish bishop of Urgel and of the French head of state, each of whom received an annual payment of a token tribute. This feudal system of government remained intact until 1993, when a constitution was adopted that greatly reduced the power of the coprinces and established separate executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government. Andorra subsequently joined the United Nations (1993) and the Council of Europe (1994).The citadel, or Ark, which was built before 1322 on the site of a collapsed mosque, is remarkable for its simplicity, its size, and the excellent condition of its brickwork. Also noteworthy are the remains of the 12-sided tomb of Maḥmūd Ghāzān, ruler of the Mongol dynasty in…Atrato River,  river in northwestern Colombia. It rises in the western slopes of the Cordillera Occidental of the Andes and flows generally northward to empty into the Gulf of Urabá of the Caribbean Sea. The river is only 416 miles (670 km) long, but its large discharge of no less than 175,000 cubic feet (5,000 cubic m) of water per second transports a very large quantity of sediment that is rapidly filling the gulf. Navigable by small boats as far upstream as Quibdó, the lower Atrato has been considered a feasible route for a transisthmian canal.…1285 onward, and its Baroque Augustusburg Castle (1725), with extensive gardens and a famous staircase by Balthasar Neumann, was their summer residence. Within Augustusburg’s gardens is the smaller Falkenlust (1733), a hunting lodge by François de Cuvilliés. The castles were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1984.Awadh,  historic region of northern India, now constituting the northeastern portion of Uttar Pradesh state.

Awadh is situated in the heavily populated heart of the Indo-Gangetic Plain and is known for its rich alluvial soils. It received its name from Ayodhya, the capital of the ancient kingdom of Kosala, which was nearly coextensive with present-day Awadh. It was taken by Muslim invaders in the 12th century and became part of the Mughal Empire in the 16th century. British interest in Awadh began in the 1760s, and after 1800 they exercised increasing control there. It was annexed (as Oudh) by the British in 1856, an action that greatly angered Indians and which has been cited as a cause of the Indian Mutiny (1857–58), the largest Indian rebellion against British rule. Lucknow, the region’s most populous city, was the scene of much fighting during the unsuccessful revolt. In 1877 the British-controlled Oudh region was joined with Agra to form the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. After India’s independence in 1947 that territory became part of Uttar Pradesh.Bābol,  city, northern Iran, on the Bābol River, about 15 miles (24 km) south of the Caspian Sea. Bābol gained importance during the reign (1797–1834) of Fatḥ ʿAlī Shāh, though ʿAbbās I (died 1629) had laid out a pleasure garden and summer palace there. The city has paved streets, large and crowded bazaars, well-built houses, and small, handsome mosques and funeral towers. There are some manufacturing activities, but larger plants are at nearby Shāhī.

Meshed-e Sar, now called Bābol Sar, was formerly the port of Bābol on the Caspian, but it lost its function after the water level dropped. It is now a fashionable resort and has an airport. Pop. (2011) 219,467; (2016) 250,217.In Bannu, about one-fourth of the cultivated area is irrigated. Annual precipitation is low, amounting to about 11 inches (275 mm). Fat-tailed sheep, camels, and donkeys are raised in Kohat and Bannu; wool is an important cash crop.
The Banqiao Dam had been built on the Ru River in the early 1950s as part of a flood-prevention and electricity-production program aimed at controlling the Huang He (Yellow River). At a height of 387 feet (118 metres) and with a storage capacity of some 17.4…Bat Yam,  city, west-central Israel, on the Plain of Sharon and the Mediterranean coast just south of Tel Aviv–Yafo. Founded in 1926 as a suburban development called Bayit ve-Gan (Hebrew: "House and Garden"), it was abandoned during the Arab riots of 1929. Resettled, it developed as a seaside resort and residential suburb of Tel Aviv. In 1936 the name was changed to Bat Yam (meaning "daughter of the sea"), and the town received municipal status. After 1950 its population grew rapidly, as housing quarters were built for new Jewish immigrants. Bat Yam is a principal centre of Israel’s printing and publishing industry; the beverage industry is also important. Inc. city, 1958. Pop. (2006 est.) 129,700.Bermejo River,  western tributary of the Paraguay River, south-central South America. It rises near Tarija, Bolivia and, after a rapid plunge to the Chaco lowlands at the border with Argentina, receives the major tributaries Grande de Tarija and San Francisco. It then meanders southeastward in shifting channels past Embarcación, El Pintado, and Presidencia Roca to join the Paraguay River opposite Pilar, Paraguay. It extends some 650 miles (1,046 km). Much silt is carried in suspension by the river, thus originating its name (bermejo, "reddish colour"). The Bermejo forms the border between Formosa and Chaco provinces, Argentina. It is navigable for small craft along its central course, which is usually referred to as the Teuco River.Bijagós Islands,  islands of Guinea-Bissau, located about 30 miles (48 km) off the Guinea coast of western Africa. They compose an archipelago of 15 main islands, among which are Caravela, Carache, Formosa, Uno, Orango, Orangozinho, Bubaque, and Roxa. They are covered with a lush vegetation and have sandy beaches, and their principal cash crops are palm products.Borden,  town, Prince county, southern Prince Edward Island, Canada, on Northumberland Strait. Named Carleton Point by the English surveyor Samuel Holland in 1765, it was renamed (1916) for Sir Robert Borden, then the Canadian prime minister. Although a fishing port, it is economically dependent upon its role as a transportation hub. Highways and a Canadian National Railway line to Charlottetown (35 miles [56 km] east) and other provincial centres radiate from the harbour, where car ferries regularly dock, connecting the island with Cape Tormentine, New Brunswick, 9 miles (14.5 km) south. From a point near Borden to Cape Tormentine the first submarine telegraph cable in North America was successfully laid (1851). Inc. 1919. Pop. (2006) 786; (2011) 750.Brechin,  small royal burgh (town), council area and historic county of Angus, Scotland, situated on the River South Esk in the fertile vale of Strathmore. One of Scotland’s three round towers (10th-century) adjoins the 12th-century cathedral. In 1296 Scotland was ceded temporarily to the English at Brechin. Brechin Castle subsequently made a gallant stand against the English forces of Edward I in 1303. Brechin became a royal burgh in 1641. Modern industries include engineering, distilling, and food processing. Brechin’s historic Caledonian Railway attracts tourists. Pop. (2001) 7,290; (2011) 7,480.Burdur,  city, southwestern Turkey. It is located near the eastern shore of Lake Burdur.

Called Polydorion in the Middle Ages, it fell to the Seljuq Turks in the 12th century and came under Ottoman domination in the 15th. Its size and economy expanded after World War II.

Industries include textiles, preparation of attar of roses, and copper manufacture. Burdur is linked by rail with Afyonkarahisar and Eskişehir and lies on the highway between Antalya and Afyonkarahisar. An archaeological museum contains objects from nearby sites, notably from Hacılar, where excavations have revealed nine stages of habitation ranging from the Chalcolithic to the Neolithic Period. Pop. (2000) 63,363; (2013 est.) 72,377.Cabinda,  northern exclave of Angola, on the west (Atlantic) coast of Africa north of the Congo River estuary. It is bordered by the Republic of the Congo to the north and northeast and is separated from Angola by part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the south and southeast. Its coastline extends for 56 miles (90 km), and its greatest width is 70 miles (113 km). With continued offshore oil discoveries, crude oil has become Cabinda’s dominant export. The production of timber, palm oil and kernels, cocoa, and coffee has declined since the rise of the local oil industry. The chief town, Cabinda, is an oil port on the right bank of the Bele (Lulondo) River.

From the mid-1970s the region was disrupted by guerrilla activities of various factions of the Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda (FLEC) as well as other groups, which were fighting for Cabindan independence from Angola. In 2004 some of the groups formed an umbrella organization, Cabinda Forum for Dialogue (which also included civil and religious groups), and their demands for independence intensified. The organization and the Angolan government signed a peace accord in 2006, largely ending the conflict in the exclave, although skirmishes occurred sporadically after that. Beginning in 2016, there was a resurgence in fighting as FLEC increased its attacks on Angolan military forces in Cabinda. Area 2,807 square miles (7,270 square km). Pop. (2014) 716,076; (2022 est.) 894,300.Caere,  ancient city of Etruria, about 30 miles (50 km) northwest of Rome. Through its port, Pyrgi (present-day Santa Severa), the city became an important trading centre in close contact with Carthage, on the northern coast of Africa in what is now Tunisia. Its citizens are reported to have saved Roman priests and sacred objects from the Gauls who sacked Rome in 390 or 387 bc. Perhaps after a revolt in 273, Caere was partially incorporated into the Roman state without voting rights for its citizens. Their names were entered on a separate register, called tabulae Caeritum ("register of citizens of Caere"). Citizens of other communities that were assigned the same status were also put on the tabulae Caeritum, as were Roman citizens deprived of the vote as a punishment.

The surrounding area is famous for its large number of tombs, which date from the 9th century bc to the late 1st century ad. Among early Classical tombs, the best known is the 7th-century Regolini-Galassi chamber tomb. Caere had a state treasury at Delphi and was the main import and distribution centre for Etruria of Greek (especially Classical Athenian) pottery. Caere itself produced Orientalizing works (such as those discovered in the Regolini-Galassi tomb) and Hellenizing pottery, jewelry, and ornaments. (See also bucchero ware.) The city declined after the time of Augustus. In the late empire it was destroyed by barbarian invaders.Canary Current,  part of a clockwise-setting ocean-current system in the North Atlantic Ocean. It branches south from the North Atlantic Current and flows southwestward along the northwest coast of Africa as far south as Senegal before turning westward to eventually join the Atlantic North Equatorial Current. The cool temperature of the water is produced by upwelling caused by offshore winds from the continent. As the current flows around the Canary Islands, it helps to lessen the heating effect of the Sahara to the east. The thermal mixing creates excellent fishing grounds in the region.Cape Saint Vincent,  cape, southwesternmost Portugal, forming with Sagres Point a promontory on the Atlantic Ocean. To the Greeks and Romans it was known, from the presence of a shrine there, as the Sacred Promontory. Tourism, pastoralism, and fishing are the economic mainstays of the region, which is somewhat desolate, and Sagres is the main settlement. Near Sagres was the town of Vila do Infante, where in about 1420 Henry the Navigator established a naval observatory and so-called school for navigators. A lighthouse and the large rock below it mark the promontory.

Several naval battles have been fought off the cape, notably one in 1797 that resulted in a victory for an English fleet under Admiral John Jervis (later Earl of St. Vincent), with Commodore (later Admiral) Horatio Nelson, over a numerically superior Spanish fleet.Castile-León,  comunidad autónoma (autonomous community) and historic region of northwestern Spain, encompassing the provincias (provinces) of Valladolid, Burgos, León, Salamanca, Zamora, Palencia, Ávila, Soria, and Segovia. Its capital is the city of Valladolid. Castile-León is bounded by the autonomous communities of Asturias, Cantabria, and the Basque Country to the north; La Rioja and Aragon to the east; Castile–La Mancha, Madrid, and Extremadura to the south; and Galicia to the northwest. Portugal lies to the west. The autonomous community of Castile-León was established on February 25, 1983, from the historic region of Old Castile. Area 36,381 square miles (94,226 square km). Pop. (2010 est.) 2,494,988.

The terrain of Castile-León consists mainly of an undulating plateau with an average elevation of about 2,500 feet (760 metres). This plateau has a natural frontier of mountains on all sides, except along the border with Portugal. The plateau is enclosed on the north by the Cantabrian Mountains, on the east by the Sierra de la Demanda and its offshoots, which are part of the Iberian Cordillera, and on the south by the Sierra de Guadarrama, Sierra de Gredos, and Sierra de Gata. On the northwest the highlands of Ancares, Caurel, and Eje separate the region from Galicia, and on the west the Duero River divides the region from the plain that declines gradually into Portugal. The Cantabrian Mountains in the north are separated from the Iberian Cordillera to the northeast by an important topographic and communication corridor, La Bureba.

The central plateau is actually the northern half of a still-larger interior plateau, the Meseta Central, that occupies almost all of central and northern Spain. Castile-León is drained chiefly by the Duero River, which flows east to west and bisects the region. A continental climate, modified by oceanic influences, prevails, with hot summers and long winters. The annual precipitation is low, ranging from 16 to 24 inches (400 to 600 mm), and is concentrated in the autumn and spring. Precipitation is higher in the mountains, where snow is common.

Castile-León’s population as a percentage of Spain’s has declined sharply since 1900. Emigration from the countryside has been especially high, with the result that the population is increasingly concentrated in the towns and especially in the provincial capitals. The chief cities are Valladolid, León, Burgos, Salamanca, and Palencia. Minifundios, or small landholdings, predominate in the countryside and are cultivated by their owners. The Leonese dialect heard in parts of the region derives from the vernacular of the Visigothic period; it is spoken in León, Zamora, Salamanca, and Valladolid provinces. Farmsteads in the mountains are ordinarily multistoried and built of stone and wood, while those in the central plateau are built of adobe. The region’s cities and towns are notable for their Romanesque churches, Gothic cathedrals, and medieval castles, which give the region its name-castillo ("castle").

The central plateau of Castile-León is endowed with naturally fertile soils, but drought is common because of inadequate rainfall, and in many areas irrigation is needed to produce good crops. Where irrigation is lacking, vast tracts of land are useless except as pasture for sheep, and much of the Castilian landscape is in fact an arid, barren, and windswept steppe, with scarcely a tree or a spring of water. Most of the cultivated land is dry-farmed, and barley is the leading crop. Irrigation is more widespread in the provinces of Valladolid and León, where the crops include sugar beets, potatoes, and beans. Grapes are largely restricted to marginal farmland and are of declining importance. In general, the fragmentation of the region’s farmland has hindered the mechanization of agriculture, and a disproportionately high percentage of the workforce continues to be employed in agriculture. Animal husbandry accounts for a large percentage of Castile-León’s agricultural output; the leading animals are sheep, pigs, and dairy and beef cattle. Many of the northern mountains are well wooded, and forestry is a major industry in these zones.

The development of manufacturing in the region did not begin until 1945 and remains modest. The National Institute of Industry has fostered the industrialization of Valladolid through long-term loans and tax incentives; that city’s manufactures are diversified and include automobiles, fertilizers, foodstuffs, and paper. The industrial development of Burgos was initiated in 1964 and has established the city as another leading industrial centre of the region. Dams in the provinces of Salamanca and Zamora generate about one-fourth of Spain’s hydroelectricity; most of the electricity generated is exported to the industrial centres of the Basque provinces and Madrid. Services are the dominant economic activity in the provincial capitals and other cities in the region.…the district of Al-Qarāfah (City of the Dead), a unique zone made up of an extensive series of cemeteries. In this vast, dusty, ochre-coloured district stand the exquisite shrine-mosques and mausoleums of early religious leaders such as Imam al-Shāfiʿī, the founder of Egypt’s major legal tradition. The major monuments……of a new campus, called Ciudad Universitaria (University City), began in 1945. Designed by Carlos Raúl Villanueva, Ciudad Universitaria was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2000 in recognition of being an excellent example of modernist architecture. Other higher-educational institutions include Simón Bolívar University, which is public and oriented……to what is now called College Hill, found a freshwater spring. From the Narragansett sachems Canonicus and Miantonomi he purchased the surrounding land, which he named for "God’s merciful providence." The settlement’s growth, halted by King Philip’s War (1675–76), was given impetus in 1680, when Pardon Tillinghast built a wharf…Comstock Lode,  rich deposit of silver in Nevada, U.S., named for Henry Comstock, part-owner of the property on which it was discovered in June 1859. Virginia City, Washoe, and other mining "boomtowns" quickly arose in the vicinity, and in 10 years the lode’s output justified establishment of a U.S. branch mint (closed in 1893) at Carson City. In the meantime, Republican leaders eager to add another loyal state to the Union used the probability that the lode would attract additional thousands to justify the admission of Nevada as a state in 1864. In the peak years of 1876–78, silver ore worth about $36,000,000 was extracted annually. Production declined sharply thereafter, and the rich lower levels of the lode were flooded in 1882. Virginia City and the other mining towns disappeared or became tourist attractions.Culver City,  city, Los Angeles county, California, U.S. Culver City is adjacent to Beverly Hills (to the north) and Inglewood (to the south), near downtown Los Angeles. The area, originally inhabited by the Tongva (Gabrielino) Indians, was explored in the late 18th century by the Spanish, who divided it into several land grants. Formed from part of Rancho La Ballona and Rincón de Los Bueyes, the city was laid out in 1914 by Harry H. Culver and promoted as a site for motion-picture production. Culver first persuaded Thomas Ince to move his studios to Culver City. Other studios followed, including Goldwyn Pictures, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), and Hal Roach Studio. By the 1990s Sony Pictures Studios was operating on the former MGM lot. Films were produced at the RKO studio, as were, later, after Desilu Productions took over, television shows. The city’s cultural life was supplemented by the Rollerdrome skate park (now Tellefson Park) and horse and automobile racetracks (all closed). In addition to the entertainment industry, the petroleum and technology industries are economic mainstays of the city. Culver City is also the site of a community college founded in 1969. Inc. 1917. Pop. (2000) 38,816; (2010) 38,883.Curicó,  city, Maule región, central Chile. It is located in the Central Valley near the Mataquito River.

Founded in 1743 as San José de Buena Vista de Curicó, it was given city status in 1830. In 1928 it was devastated by an earthquake, but the fine Plaza de Armas (central square) survived. An earthquake in 2010 also caused extensive damage. The surrounding agricultural area is famed for its wine grapes. The city has flour mills and wineries and is the centre for local huasos (cowboys). It is on the Pan-American Highway and main north-south railroad, and branches of both run westward to Licantén, near the Pacific. Pop. (2002) 93,447; (2017) municipality, 149,136.Dąbrowa Górnicza,  city, Śląskie województwo (province), southern Poland, on the Czarna Przemsza River just northeast of Katowice. It flourished when coal mining began there in 1796. During the 19th century Dąbrowa Górnicza served as a mining and metallurgical research centre and had the first Polish mining school (1889). It became a town in 1916.

Dąbrowa Górnicza is situated in the Upper Silesian industrial area and on the Katowice-Warsaw rail line. It is located over one of the thickest coal deposits in the world, measuring up to nearly 80 feet (24 metres) in thickness. Part of the coal seam is now a national geological reserve. It is the site of one of the largest iron- and steelworks in Poland. Pop. (2011) 125,905.…affiliated with Karnatak University in Dharwad.Dong Nai River,  river rising in the central highlands (Annamese Cordillera) of southern Vietnam, northwest of Da Lat. Near its source the river has rapids and is known as the Da Dung River. It flows west and southwest for about 300 miles (480 km), joining the Saigon River southwest of Bien Hoa. At the rapids of Tri An, west of Dinh Quan, it is joined by the Be River. The Nhim, an important upper tributary, rises northeast of Da Lat on the Lam Vien Plateau and has three sets of rapids and falls. Two of the cascades, Lien Khuong and Gu Gau, are below Phi Mum; the third, Pongour, just west of the Nhim’s junction with the Dong Nai, has been harnessed for hydroelectric power. The Dong Nai, or Donnai, gave its name to the Upper Donnai (Haute Donnai) province and plateau region of French colonial Vietnam.Eritrea,  country of the Horn of Africa, located on the Red Sea. Eritrea’s coastal location has long been important in its history and culture-a fact reflected in its name, which is an Italianized version of Mare Erythraeum, Latin for "Red Sea." The Red Sea was the route by which Christianity and Islam reached the area, and it was an important trade route that such powers as Turkey, Egypt, and Italy hoped to dominate by seizing control of ports on the Eritrean coast. Those ports promised access to the gold, coffee, and slaves sold by traders in the Ethiopian highlands to the south, and, in the second half of the 20th century, Ethiopia became the power from which the Eritrean people had to free themselves in order to create their own state.

In 1993, after a war of independence that lasted nearly three decades, Eritrea became a sovereign country. During the long struggle, the people of Eritrea managed to forge a common national consciousness, but, with peace established, they faced the task of overcoming their ethnic and religious differences in order to raise the country from a poverty made worse by years of drought, neglect, and war. Eritrea’s capital and largest city is Asmara (Asmera).

Eritrea’s coastline, forming the northeastern edge of the country, extends for roughly 600 miles (1,000 km) from Cape Kasar, in the north, to the Strait of Mandeb, separating the Red Sea from the Gulf of Aden in the south. The country is bounded to the southeast by Djibouti, to the south by Ethiopia, and to the west by Sudan.

Eritrea’s land is highly variegated. Running on a north-south axis through the middle of the country are the central highlands, a narrow strip of country some 6,500 feet (2,000 metres) above sea level that represents the northern reaches of the Ethiopian Plateau. The highest point is Mount Soira, at 9,885 feet (3,013 metres). Geologically, the plateau consists of a foundation of crystalline rock (e.g., granite, gneiss, and mica schist) that is overlain by sedimentary rock (limestone and sandstone) and capped by basalt (rock of volcanic origin). The upper layers have been highly dissected by deep gorges and river channels, forming small, steep-sided, flat-topped tablelands known as ambas. Encouraged by the steady expansion of cultivation, soil erosion on the plateau has left few wooded areas.

In the north of Eritrea the highlands narrow and then end in a system of hills, where erosion has cut down to the basement rock. To the east the plateau drops abruptly into a coastal plain. North of the Gulf of Zula, the plain is only 10 to 50 miles (15 to 80 km) wide, but to the south it widens to include the Danakil Plain. This barren region contains a depression known as the Kobar Sink (more than 300 feet [90 metres] below sea level), the northern end of which extends into Eritrea. The coastal plain and the Danakil Plain are part of the East African Rift System and are sharply delimited on the west by the eastern escarpment of the plateau, which, although deeply eroded, presents a formidable obstacle to travelers from the coast.

The western flank of the central highlands is a broken and undulating plain that slopes gradually toward the border with Sudan. It lies at an average elevation of 1,500 feet (460 metres). The vegetation is mostly savanna, consisting of scattered trees, shrubs, and seasonal grasses.

Off the coast in the Red Sea is the Dahlak Archipelago, a group of more than 100 small coral and reef-fringed islands. Only a few of these islands have a permanent population.

The Eritrean highlands are drained by four major rivers and numerous streams. Two of the rivers, the Gash and the Tekezē, flow westward into Sudan. The Tekezē River (also known as the Satit) is a major tributary of the Atbara River, which eventually joins the Nile. The Gash River reaches the Atbara only during flood season. As it crosses the western lowlands, the Tekezē forms part of Eritrea’s border with Ethiopia, while the upper course of the Gash, known as the Mereb River, forms the border on the plateau.

The other two major rivers that drain the highlands of Eritrea are the Baraka and the Anseba. Both of these rivers flow northward into a marshy area on the eastern coast of Sudan and do not reach the Red Sea. Several seasonal streams that flow eastward from the plateau reach the sea on the Eritrean coast.

Eritrea has a wide variety of climatic conditions, produced mainly by differences in elevation. The effects of elevation are seen most clearly in the wide range of temperatures experienced throughout the country. On the coast, Massawa (Mitsiwa) has one of the highest averages in the world (the mid-80s F [about 30 °C]), while Asmara, only 40 miles (65 km) away yet roughly 7,500 feet (2,300 metres) higher on the plateau, averages in the low 60s F (about 17 °C).

Mean annual rainfall on the plateau is about 16 to 20 inches (400 to 500 mm), while on the western plain it is less than 16 inches. In both the highlands and the western lowlands, rainfall comes in summer, carried on a southwesterly airstream. Toward the northeastern extremes of the plateau, the amount of precipitation decreases, and the length of the rainy season becomes shorter. The eastern edges of the plateau and, to a lesser extent, the coastal fringes receive much smaller quantities of rain from a northeasterly airstream that arrives in winter and spring. The interior regions of the Danakil Plain are practically rainless.

Eritrea’s population consists of several ethnic groups, each with its own language and cultural tradition. In addition to the languages spoken by the various ethnic groups, Arabic and English are widely understood. Italian is occasionally used as well.

The bulk of the people in the Eritrean highlands are Tigray. In Eritrea that group is sometimes called Tigrinya, though linguists of Semitic languages note that -nya is an Amharic suffix meaning "language of." In any case, proper nomenclature for the people is fluid, given contemporary political sensitivities. The Tigray make up about half the country’s total population. They also occupy the adjacent Ethiopian region of Tigray. The Tigrinya language is one of two major indigenous languages in Eritrea.

Inhabiting the northernmost part of the Eritrean plateau, as well as lowlands to the east and west, are the Tigre people. The Tigre, who constitute nearly one-third of Eritrea’s population, speak the other major Eritrean language-Tigré. Tigré and Tigrinya are written in the same script and are both related to the ancient Semitic Geʿez language, but they are mutually unintelligible.

Also occupying the northern plateau are Bilin speakers, whose language belongs to the Cushitic family. The Rashaida are a group of Arabic-speaking nomads who traverse the northern hills. On the southern part of the coastal region live Afar nomads. The Afars-who also live across the borders in Djibouti and Ethiopia-are known to surrounding peoples as the Danakil, after the region that they inhabit. The coastal strip south of Massawa, as well as the eastern flanks of the plateau, are occupied by Saho pastoralists. In the western plain the dominant people are Beja pastoralists; Beja also live across the border in Sudan. Two small groups speaking Nilotic languages, the Kunama and the Nara, also live in the west.Fátima,  village and sanctuary, central Portugal. It is located on the tableland of Cova da Iria, 18 miles (29 km) southeast of Leiria.

Fátima was named for a 12th-century Moorish princess, and since 1917 it has been one of the greatest Marian shrines in the world, visited by thousands of pilgrims annually. On May 13, 1917, and in each subsequent month until October of that year, three young peasant children, Lucia dos Santos and her cousins Francisco and Jacinta Marto, reportedly saw a woman who identified herself as the Lady of the Rosary. On October 13, a crowd (generally estimated at about 70,000) gathered at Fátima witnessed a "miraculous solar phenomenon" immediately after the lady had appeared to the children. After initial opposition, the bishop of Leiria on October 13, 1930, accepted the children’s visions as the appearance of the Virgin Mary; in the same year, papal indulgences were granted to pilgrims. The content of the devotion includes frequent recitation of the rosary and devotion to the Immaculate Heart of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

The first national pilgrimage to Fátima took place in 1927, and the basilica was begun in 1928 and consecrated in 1953. With a tower 213 feet (65 metres) high, surmounted by a large bronze crown and a crystal cross, it is flanked by hospitals and retreat houses and faces a vast square in which is the little Chapel of the Apparitions. Numerous cures have been reported, though publicity has not been sought. On the 50th anniversary of the first vision, May 13, 1967, a crowd of pilgrims, estimated to number one million, gathered at Fátima to hear Pope Paul VI say mass and pray for peace.

At the end of the 20th century, there was growing speculation concerning the three messages the Virgin Mary was said to have revealed to the peasant children in 1917. Though two of the messages had been disclosed in the 1940s-commonly interpreted as the prediction of the end of World War I and the start of World War II and the rise and fall of communism-the third had been kept secret by the Vatican, giving rise to numerous theories. In May 2000 it was finally announced that the third message was the Virgin Mary’s vision of the 1981 assassination attempt on Pope John Paul II. The news came during a beatification ceremony for Francisco and Jacinta Marto. Pop. (2001) 7,756; (2011 est.) 7,710.Fitzroy River,  river in eastern Queensland, Australia, formed by the confluence of the Dawson and Mackenzie rivers, on the slopes of the Great Dividing Range. The united stream flows northeast across the Broadsound Range and then southeast through distributaries to enter Keppel Bay of the Coral Sea of the Pacific Ocean after a course of 300 miles (480 km).

Its catchment area with its main tributary, the 100-mile (160-km) Margaret River, is 55,000 square miles (142,000 square km). The Fitzroy is navigable from Port Alma, at the mouth, 35 miles (56 km) upstream to Rockhampton. Other towns along the river, which is named after Sir Charles FitzRoy, governor of New South Wales (1845–55), are Morgan, Clermont, Springsure, and Emerald. Experimental pasturing and rice farming are practiced along the lower floodplain.Gastein Valley,  side valley of the Salzach River, in Bundesland (federal state) Salzburg, west-central Austria. Lying along the north slope of the Hohe Tauern Mountains and traversed by the Gasteiner River, it is a popular scenic area centred on the resorts of Badgastein (q.v.) and Bad Hofgastein.Gatchina,  city, Leningrad oblast (province), northwestern Russia, lying about 28 miles (45 km) southwest of St. Petersburg. The first mention of Khotchino dates from 1499, when it was a possession of Novgorod. Later it belonged to Livonia and Sweden. After 1721 it was returned to Russia and in the 1720s belonged to the sister of Peter I the Great, Natalia. The town grew only after the building, between 1766 and 1772, of a summer palace there for Catherine II’s favourite, Count Orlov. The palace was designed by the Italian architect Antonio Rinaldi; it had about 600 rooms, a theatre, and many works of art and was surrounded by a fine park. Upon Orlov’s disgrace the palace passed to Catherine’s son, Paul I, who transformed it into a combination of palace, fortress, and barracks. Although badly damaged during World War II, the palace was restored and is now a museum. The modern city is a railway junction, with machine building, metalworking, and light industries. Pop. (2006 est.) 88,842.…regions which the Romans called Germania Inferior and Germania Superior, respectively. In 12 bce Drusus took the army of Germania Superior on an expedition to crush the Sicambri, Frisii, and Chauci tribes to the north. He was able to force the tribes to surrender before year’s end, and some sources……complex known as the "Golden Horseshoe" sprawls along the Lake Ontario shore from Oshawa to St. Catharines and includes greater Toronto and the port and industrial city of Hamilton. Toronto is Canada’s largest city. Its hinterland embraces not only much of the province but also a good part of…Grottaglie,  town, Puglia (Apulia) region, southern Italy. The town’s castle dates from the 14th century; the church of the Matrice has a facade of the same period and a 16th-century stone relief of the Annunciation. Its chief industry is pottery manufacture, and there is a school of ceramics. Grottaglie is named for grottoes in the local rocks. Pop. (2006 est.) mun., 32,610.Gulf of Messenia,  gulf of the Ionian Sea (Modern Greek: Ióvio Pélagos) in the nomós (department) of Messenia (Messinía), southwestern Peloponnese (Pelopónnisos), Greece. It is enclosed by the Likódimon Óros (mountain) and Ákra (cape) Akrítas on the west and the Máni peninsula on the east.

The non-navigable Pámisos Potamós (river), rising in the Mínthi Óros of Messenia, empties at the head of the gulf just west of Kalamáta, a manufacturing centre and the second port of the Peloponnese. On the east side of the Akrítas is the port of Koróni (ancient Asine), originally settled by Argives after the First Messenian War (c. 735–c. 715 bce). Reoccupied during the Middle Ages by refugees from the north who gave it the name of their former village, Koróni retains Byzantine, Venetian, and Turkish fortifications. In 1828 the French landed in this gulf during the War of Greek Independence to help clear the Peloponnese of Turks.…in the south among Artois, Hainaut, and the town of Douay, based on the Pacification of Ghent but retaining the Roman Catholic religion, loyalty to the king, and the privileges of the estates. As a reaction to the accommodation of Artois and Hainaut, the Union of Utrecht was declared, at…Hamburg,  city and Land (state), located on the Elbe River in northern Germany. It is the country’s largest port and commercial centre.

The Free and Hanseatic City (Freie und Hansestadt) of Hamburg is the second smallest of the 16 Länder of Germany, with a territory of only 292 square miles (755 square km). It is also the most populous city in Germany after Berlin and has one of the largest and busiest ports in Europe. The official name, which covers both the Land and the town, reflects Hamburg’s long tradition of particularism and self-government. Hamburg and Bremen (the smallest of the Länder) are, in fact, the only German city-states that still keep something of their medieval independence. The characteristic individuality of Hamburg has been proudly maintained by its people so that, in many spheres of public and private life, the city’s culture has retained its uniqueness and has not succumbed to the general trend of standardization.

Hamburg, nonetheless, is a cosmopolitan city in its outlook. Although comparatively few foreigners live there, many pass through it. The city has dealings with a large number of nations, and it has more consulates than any other city in the world, except New York City. Shipping and trade have been Hamburg’s lifeblood for centuries. Not surprisingly, its harbour has remained the city’s most important feature.

Among Hamburg’s many other facets are a network of canals reminiscent of Amsterdam; lakes, parks, and verdant suburbs full of gracious houses; elegant shopping arcades; richly endowed museums; and a vibrant cultural life. These are among the attractions that have contributed to a growing tourist industry. Although it was badly damaged during World War II, Hamburg has succeeded in maintaining a sense of old-world grace alongside its thriving commercial life. Area 292 square miles (756 square km). Pop. (2011) 1,706,696; (2021 est.) 1,853,935.

Hamburg stands at the northern extremity of the lower Elbe valley, which at that point is between 5 and 8 miles (8 and 13 km) wide. To the southeast of the old city, the Elbe divides itself into two branches, the Norderelbe and the Süderelbe, but these branches meet again opposite Altona, just west of the old city, to form the Unterelbe, which flows into the North Sea some 65 miles downstream from Hamburg. Two other rivers flow into the Elbe at Hamburg-the Alster from the north and the Bille from the east.

The nucleus of the city is the Altstadt (Old Town), the former medieval settlement, bounded by the harbour and by a string of roads that follow the line of the old fortifications. Within this core there are few great buildings to remind the visitor of the city’s thousand-year history apart from the five principal churches-Sankt Jacobi, Sankt Petri, Sankt Katharinen, Sankt Nikolai, and Sankt Michaelis-and none of these is in its original condition. Fire has destroyed almost all the older residences and warehouses, and what was left untouched by conflagration has often been rebuilt for contemporary purposes. There are, however, a few scattered survivals of older buildings. Moreover, the layout of the old city centre can still be detected in some of the ancient street names and in the Fleete (canals), which connect the Alster with the docks on the Elbe. One of the best views of the inner city is to be enjoyed from the Lombardsbrücke (Lombard Bridge), whence the towers of the five churches can be seen rising high against a skyline that is still relatively harmonious despite the presence of modern skyscrapers.

At the heart of Hamburg is a lake, measuring 455 acres (184 hectares), formed by the damming of the Alster and divided by the Lombardsbrücke into the Binnenalster (Inner Alster) and the Aussenalster (Outer Alster). Around the latter are elegant suburbs such as Rotherbaum, Harvesterhude, and Uhlenhorst. Many waterways, navigable by pleasure boats, run into the Aussenalster.

The last intact ensemble of traditional Hamburg architecture is to be found in the Deichstrasse, one side of which backs onto the Nikolai canal. Its tall, narrow houses, resembling those of Amsterdam, were originally built from the 17th through the 19th century. It was in one of them, number 42, now a restaurant, that the devastating fire of 1842 broke out. Afterward the houses were rebuilt in the old style. Today the street is a protected area, and in recent years it has undergone extensive restoration. Many traditional restaurants are found there.

Another survival of older architecture is in the Krameramtswohnungen, near Sankt Michaelis. Consisting of two half-timbered brick buildings on either side of a narrow courtyard, it was built as a series of dwellings for the widows of shopkeepers and is the only surviving 17th-century construction of its kind in the city. Thoroughly restored between 1971 and 1974, it now forms a delightful secluded alleyway housing a restaurant, small shops, and a branch of the Museum für Hamburgische Geschichte (Museum of Hamburg History).

Of Hamburg’s five great churches, the most imposing is probably Sankt Michaelis, an 18th-century Baroque-style Protestant church with a rich white-and-gold interior. It was destroyed by fire in 1906, rebuilt, devastated again during World War II, and restored yet again after the war.

The prosperous years 1890–1910 brought an abundance of fine architecture, examples of which can be seen in the spacious and elegant patrician houses around the Aussenalster. Many of these are now occupied by consulates. Another period of architectural flowering came in the 1920s and 1930s when there was a revival of the use of the traditional north German dark red brick as a building material, led by the architects Fritz Höger and Fritz Schumacher. A good example is Höger’s Chilehaus, a massive office building constructed between 1922 and 1924.

More recently Hamburg has acquired its quota of starkly functional modern buildings, such as the Congress Centrum (Congress Centre; opened 1973) and the Fernsehturm (Television Tower), 271.5 metres (891 feet) high, but there is now a strong tendency to renovate old houses rather than to demolish and build afresh. Thus the townscape of Hamburg as a whole has a human quality lacking in many German cities.Hankou,  large urban area and river port, east-central Hubei sheng (province), central China. Located on the left bank of the Han River at its confluence with the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang), it is the largest of the three former cities (the other two being Hanyang and Wuchang) now constituting the Wuhan conurbation.

It was founded as Jiangxia under the Song dynasty (960–1279). During the Ming (1368–1644) and Qing (1644–1911/12) dynasties, it was one of the four most famous towns (zhen) in China. Hankou was one of the first Chinese cities opened to foreign trade (1861); it came under Nationalist Chinese administration in 1928; and it was occupied by the Japanese in 1938–45. In 1949, following the establishment of the People’s Republic of China, it became part of Wuhan. Hankou is the most populous component of the great Wuhan urban complex and has the conurbation’s most thriving business sector.Hedeby,  in medieval Danish history, trade centre at the southeastern base of the Jutland Peninsula on the Schlei estuary. It served as an early focus of national unification and as a crossroads for Western–Eastern European and European–Western Asian trade.

One of the earliest Scandinavian urban centres, Hedeby was established in the late 8th century. Its trade, which included slaves, furs, textiles, iron, and weapons, was complimented by a well-developed artisan and industrial establishment. In the early 9th century King Godfred of Denmark built the Danewirk, an earthwork barrier, along the base of the peninsula south of Hedeby to protect the thriving centre from Frankish incursions. Despite this and other precautions, the Danes lost Hedeby for most of the 10th century-first to the Swedes and then to the Franks. Even after King Harald Bluetooth regained Hedeby in 983, the town suffered Norwegian and Wendish Slav raids into the 11th century; by the middle of that century it was abandoned, its activity being transferred to neighbouring Schleswig (ancient Sliesthorp, or Sliaswic).Helena,  city, seat (1830) of Phillips county, eastern Arkansas, U.S., port of the Mississippi River, about 50 miles (80 km) southwest of Memphis, Tennessee, and adjacent to the city of West Helena. The community, originally settled in 1797 and first called Monticello and then St. Francis, grew around a warehouse built for barge shipping. In 1811 the steamboat "New Orleans" called there, opening a prosperous era of river traffic. The county was named for Sylvanus Phillips, and the settlement was renamed (1821) for his daughter. The city was a Union supply depot during the American Civil War, and the Battle of Helena (July 4, 1863) was a futile attempt by the Confederates to capture it.

The economy, traditionally based on cotton and lumber, became increasingly industrialized after World War II, especially at West Helena (founded 1909, incorporated 1917). One of the largest harbors on an inland waterway was completed in the 1990s, making Helena a hub of industrial development. Helena is the seat of Phillips Community College of the University of Arkansas (1965). St. Francis National Forest is immediately to the north. Helena has been called the "cradle of the Delta Blues," and each October the city’s King Biscuit Blues Festival draws fans from around the world. Inc. town, 1833; city, 1856. Pop. (2000) 6,323; (2010) 12,282.…3,012 feet (918 m) at Herbert Peak. The peninsula was originally an island formed by two contiguous volcanic cones but was joined to the mainland by sediments of the Waimakariri River. It was visited (1770) by Captain James Cook, who named it after Sir Joseph Banks, and it was surveyed…Hougang (lower stratum) remains have been found in southern Hebei and central Henan. The vessels, some finished on a slow wheel, were mainly red-coloured and had been fired at high heat. They include jars, tripods, and round-bottomed, flat-bottomed, and ring-footed bowls. No pointed amphorae have……of Wusong River) and the Huangpu River (a tributary of the Yangtze), which flow through the city, are severely polluted from industrial discharges, domestic sewage, and ships’ wastes; nonetheless, the Huangpu is Shanghai’s main water source. Environmental protection and urban cleanliness are enhanced by industrial and solid waste resource-recovery operations…IJsselmeer,  shallow freshwater lake, northern and central Netherlands. It was formed from the southern part of the former Zuiderzee by the building of a dam (Afsluitdijk; completed 1932) separating the IJsselmeer from both the Waddenzee (the northern part of the former Zuiderzee) and the North Sea.

The dam that formed the IJsselmeer lies about 25 feet (8 meters) above sea level and is 19 miles (31 km) long, extending between the provinces of Noord-Holland and Friesland. The dam was constructed of boulder clay backed by sand and is faced with stone to just below water level, on a base of boulders resting on mats of willow. There is a highway and bicycle path along the top of the dam; locks provide passage for barges and small seagoing craft. Regulated by sluices, the formerly brackish water has been replaced by fresh water, partly by inflow from the IJssel River, a branch of the Rhine River. This source of fresh water is valuable to Noord-Holland and Zuid-Holland and Friesland during occasional summer droughts and also helps to improve their brackish marshlands. The original fishing for herring, anchovies, and flounder has been replaced by freshwater fisheries, chiefly for eels. In spring, the eel larvae, born in the Sargasso Sea (a large tract of relatively still water in the North Atlantic Ocean) enter the lake through the locks.

Large parts of the lake’s total area of 1,328 square miles (3,440 square km) have been reclaimed by constructing encircling dikes and pumping the water out. As a result, the land area of the Netherlands has been increased by 626 square miles (1,620 square km) of fertile polders.…visitors arrive by hiking the Inca Trail. The portion of the trail from the "km 88" train stop to Machu Picchu is normally hiked in three to six days. It is composed of several thousand stone-cut steps, numerous high retaining walls, tunnels, and other feats of classical engineering; the route…Iron Gate,  the last gorge of the Ðerdap gorge system on the Danube River, dividing the Carpathian and Balkan mountains and forming part of the boundary between Serbia and Romania. It is about 2 miles (3 km) long and 530 feet (162 metres) wide, with towering rock cliffs that make it one of the most dramatic natural wonders of Europe. Near the town of Sip a large rock reef (called Perigrada) obstructed nearly the whole width of the river until the construction of the Sip Canal in 1896. A joint development project of Romania and Yugoslavia on the Danube River (including a dam and hydroelectric power plant) was completed in 1972, providing equal amounts of energy to each country and quadrupling the annual tonnage of shipping. The name Iron Gate is commonly applied to the whole 90-mile- (145-kilometre-) long gorge system.Kārūn River,  river in southwestern Iran, a tributary of the Shatt al-Arab, which it joins at Khorramshahr. It rises in the Bakhtīārī Mountains west of Eṣfahān and follows a tortuous course trending basically southwest. The Kārūn’s total length is 515 miles (829 km), though the direct distance from its source to the junction with the Shatt al-Arab is only 180 miles (290 km). Its catchment basin up to Ahvāz has an area of 22,069 square miles (57,059 square km), of which 7,000 square miles (18,130 square km) belong to its main tributary, the Dez. Most of the area is mountainous, forming part of the limestone Zagros ranges.

The river’s course divides into three parts: from the sources to Gatvand, where the river emerges from the mountains; from Gatvand to Band Qīr, where it is joined by the Dez; and from Band Qīr through Ahvāz southward to the Shatt al-Arab. In its upper course the Kārūn is a powerful stream, increasing in volume as it is successively joined by its tributaries. For long stretches it flows rapidly between high precipices. At Band Qīr the river, enlarged by the Dez, is navigable to its mouth except for about 2 miles (3 km) of rapids at Ahvāz. Below Ahvāz the river is sometimes too shallow for navigation, especially during the dry season. Seasonal variation in discharge rate shows the lowest water level to be in October, and the highest, as the result of combined precipitation and meltwater, in April.

Formerly the Kārūn had a lower course that was separated from and to the east of the Shatt al-Arab. There are three old riverbeds (apparently used successively) that branch off at the left of the Kārūn; they are known as Shatt al-Qadimi (Farsi: "Ancient River"), Shatt al-ʿAmeh (Farsi: "Blind River"), and Rūdkhāneh-ye Bahmanshīr. Rūdkhāneh-ye Bahmanshīr delimits the eastern edge of the island of Abadan. In 1765, however, the river changed to its present course through the apparently artificial Haffār Channel. According to the geographer al-Maqdisī, this channel was dug in ad 986 to facilitate water communication between Ahvāz and Basra. This change resulted in frontier disputes between the Ottoman Empire and Iran, disputes that were settled by the treaty of Erzurum (1847), giving Iran access to the eastern bank of the Shatt al-Arab and the right to use the waterway.

The Kārūn up to Ahvāz was opened to international navigation in 1888, and boat services were later established between Ahvāz and Band Qīr. Shipping on the lower course of the Kārūn has become increasingly important owing to oil drilling and refining in the vicinity. To increase the water supply of Eṣfahān, a dam and tunnel on the river were completed in 1971.Qazvīn,  city, capital of Qazvīn province, north-central Iran. The city sits in a wide, fertile plain at the southern foot of the Elburz Mountains.

Originally called Shad Shāhpūr, it was founded by the Sāsānian king Shāpūr I about 250 ce. It flourished in early Muslim times (7th century), serving as a base for Islamization, and was surrounded by strong fortifications by Hārūn al-Rashīd. Genghis Khan laid waste the city, but it revived under the Ṣafavids when Shāh Ṭahmāsp I (ruled 1524–1576) moved the capital from Tabrīz to Qazvīn. The city lost its eminence once again when ʿAbbās I (the Great; ruled 1588–1629) transferred the government to Eṣfahān in 1598. Nādir Shāh assumed the crown in Qazvīn shortly after his return from invading India in 1739 and before returning to Mashhad, then capital of Iran. Āghā Moḥammed Khān of the Qājār dynasty reestablished Qazvīn about 1796 as a major base for foreign trade with the Caspian Sea, Persian Gulf, and Asia Minor. Interference by Russia and Britain in the internal politics of Iran in the 19th century and the autocratic rule of the country resulted in unrest and the growth of a nationalist movement. The city fell to a nationalist force from Rasht in 1909. The British established a military headquarters in Qazvīn in the 1920s. A coup d’état was launched from Qazvīn in 1921 that led to Iran’s consolidation under Reza Shah Pahlavi. There were riots and fighting between the local people and the Iranian army during the Iranian Revolution in 1978–79.

Qazvīn is a regional communications centre, connected by road and rail with Tehrān and Tabrīz and by road with the Caspian Sea and Hamadan. Industries include cloth weaving, cotton ginning, wool carding, flour milling, food processing, and electrical equipment manufacturing. There is a thermoelectric plant, and a modern poultry-raising complex was developed with the help of the former Agricultural Development Bank of Iran. Buildings dating from the time of the Seljuq sultans include the Jāmiʿ Masjid (Friday Mosque); the Madrasah Haidariye, a square hall surmounted by a cupola; the tomb of Mostowfi, the Persian traveler; and the mosque of the shah. In the mountains about 37 miles (60 km) northeast of Qazvīn are the remains of a castle of the Assassins. Pop. (2006) 355,338.Kemerovo,  city and administrative centre of Kemerovo oblast (region), south-central Russia. Kemerovo lies along the Tom River near the foothills of the Kuznetsk Alatau Mountains. The small village of Kemerovo was founded in the 1830s and merged with the village of Shcheglovo in 1918 to form the city of Shcheglovsk. The city began to grow rapidly with the development of the Kuznetsk Coal Basin, and in 1932 it reverted to the name Kemerovo. Today it is a major coal-mining centre, with pits in and around the city, and it is one of the most important chemical-manufacturing cities in Russia. Its products include nitrogenous fertilizers, plastics, material for synthetic fibres, aniline dyes and paints, caustic soda, ammonia, and pharmaceutical goods. The city’s engineering industries manufacture coal-mining equipment and agricultural machinery, and sawmilling and timber working are important. There are mining and teacher-training institutes in the city. Pop. (2006 est.) 520,138.Kirovohrad,  city, south-central Ukraine. It lies along the upper Inhul River where the latter is crossed by the Kremenchuk-Odessa railway. Founded as a fortress in 1754, it was made a city, Yelysavethrad (Russian: Yelizavetgrad, or Elizavetgrad), in 1765 and developed as the centre of a rich agricultural area. It was renamed Zinovyevsk in 1924, Kirovo in 1936, and Kirovohrad in 1939. Industries have included food processing and agricultural-machinery production. Kirovohrad has a teacher-training institute. Pop. (2001) 254,103; (2005 est.) 248,367.…local temple, were discovered at Kollur, in Mysore state.Lake Maracaibo,  large inlet of the Caribbean Sea, lying in the Maracaibo Basin of northwestern Venezuela. Some sources consider the water body to be the largest natural lake in South America, covering an area of about 5,130 square miles (13,280 square km), extending southward for 130 miles (210 km) from the Gulf of Venezuela and reaching a width of 75 miles (121 km). Other sources note, however, that Lake Maracaibo is more properly termed an inlet because much of the water it receives is brought in by the tide from the Atlantic Ocean. See Researcher’s Note: Lake Titicaca versus Lake Maracaibo.

Many rivers flow into Lake Maracaibo, the most important being the Catatumbo River, a transportation artery for products from the adjacent regions and from the Colombian-Venezuelan highlands. The lake water in the southern portion is fresh, but a stronger tidal influence makes the northern waters somewhat brackish. The lake is quite shallow except toward the south, and it is surrounded by swampy lowlands. For many years a bar at the mouth of the lake, extending some 16 miles (26 km), restricted navigation to vessels drawing less than 13 feet (4 metres) of water. After constant dredging in the 1930s increased the depth to 25 feet (8 metres), a 2-mile- (3-km-) long stone breakwater and a 35-foot- (11-metre-) deep channel were completed in 1957 to accommodate oceangoing ships and tankers.

Lake Maracaibo is one of the world’s richest and most centrally located petroleum-producing regions. The first productive well was drilled in 1917, and the productive area has come to include a 65-mile (105-km) strip along the eastern shore, extending 20 miles (32 km) out into the lake. Thousands of derricks protrude from the water and many more line the shore, while underwater pipelines transport the petroleum to storage tanks on the land. The lake’s basin supplies about two-thirds of the total Venezuelan petroleum output. Most of the industry was developed by foreign (chiefly American, British, and Dutch) investment, with very few locally owned wells, but in 1975 the petroleum industry was nationalized. Natural gas is also obtained.Lampsacus,   ancient Greek city on the Asiatic shore of the Hellespont, best known for its wines, and the chief seat of the worship of Priapus, a god of procreation and fertility. Colonized in 654 bc by Ionian Phocaea, the city had a fine harbour. It took part in the Ionian revolt against Persia (499) and later joined the Delian League. Upon the fall of Athens in 405, Lampsacus came under Persian control until Alexander freed it with the rest of Greece during his invasion in 334.

The city, which became the site of one of Alexander’s mints, seems to have been prosperous, as indicated by the high tribute it paid to the Delian League. Lefká Mountains,  highest and most precipitous massif in western Crete (Modern Greek: Kríti), located a few miles south of the Cretan capital, Chaniá, in the nomós (department) of Chaniá, Greece. The limestone peaks have been hollowed out by erosion into high plains such as the Omalós (1,650–3,300 ft [500–1,000 m]), which gives access from the village of Lákkoi to the Samaria gorge, 11 mi (18 km) long and 1,000 ft deep, the longest mountain gorge in Europe, which opens out to the Mediterranean Sea on Crete’s southwest coast in the town of Ayía Roumeli.

Bearing a stream during the wet season, the Samaria provides the only route of transit to the south coast over the Lefká range. The massif is separated from Mount Apopigádhi (4,367 ft [1,331 m]) on the west by a depression carrying the road from Chaniá to Ayía Iríni; on the east it is defined by the depression carrying the road from Vrísai to Chóra Sfakíon. At least four of the Lefká peaks exceed 6,600 ft. The highest is Mount Lefká at 8,045 ft (2,452 m). The major stream rising from the Lefká is the Plataniás, which flows past Lákkoi northwestward into the Kólpos (gulf) Khaníon. The region is believed to be the last habitat of the Cretan agrimi, a wild goat. The Lefká Mountains have historically provided the southwest coast of Crete with a natural defense against invaders, from the Ottoman Turks to the Germans during World War II.Leipzig,  city, western Saxony Land (state), east-central Germany. It lies just above the junction of the Pleisse, Parthe, and Weisse Elster rivers, about 115 miles (185 km) southwest of Berlin. Leipzig is situated in the fertile, low-lying Leipzig Basin, which has extensive deposits of lignite (brown coal). Although encircled by a belt of parks and gardens, the city is a major industrial centre and transport junction, and it lies at the core of the Halle-Leipzig metropolitan agglomeration. The countryside around the city consists of a plain that is intensively farmed.

Leipzig entered recorded history in 1015 ce as the fortified town of Urbs Libzi and was granted municipal status by 1170. Its favourable position in the middle of a plain intersected by the principal trade routes of central Europe stimulated the town’s commercial development. Its two annual markets, at Easter and at Michaelmas (September 29), were raised in 1497 to the rank of imperial fairs. Additional economic privileges enabled Leipzig to become the foremost German commercial centre by about 1700, a development that in turn promoted the growth of a network of roads converging on the town. Leipzig’s focal geographic situation had another, less fortunate consequence-several important battles were fought in or near the town. These included two at Breitenfeld (now a suburb) in 1631 and 1642, one at Lützen in 1632 during the Thirty Years’ War, and in particular the Battle of Leipzig (or Battle of the Nations) in October 1813 in the Napoleonic Wars.

The town’s enviable economic status stimulated a notable cultural life based particularly on the early development of the printing industry but also including the musical efflorescence associated with Johann Sebastian Bach. Trade continued to be the most important economic activity in the town, with books, furs, yarns, and textiles the primary commodities traded. In 1839 the first German railroad was opened between Leipzig and Dresden, and the accompanying growth of banks provided capital for the city’s growing textile and metallurgical industries.

One-fourth of Leipzig was destroyed in the last years of World War II. After the devastation of the war, the restoration and reconstruction of the city were carried out under the communist policies of East Germany. With renewed attention being paid to the Leipzig Fair and other exhibitions held in the city, Leipzig continued to play an important role among European cities. Peaceful but massive demonstrations by citizens of Leipzig in late 1989 played a significant role in bringing an end to the communist regime of East Germany.

The traditional book-publishing and fur industries of Leipzig are still well known. Modern industries include heavy engineering and the manufacture of machinery and motor-vehicle parts. Services are also economically important. The annual Leipzig Fair, held in the spring, is one of the most important forums for international trade between eastern and western Europe. Leipzig is the centre of many railway lines, and its main railway station is one of the most important passenger stations in central Europe and the world’s largest dead-end rail station. Leipzig is also the site of Bayerischer Bahnhof, Europe’s oldest operating train station. Leipzig is the focus of several major roads, and two airports serve the city.

Historic landmarks were restored after both World War II and German reunification. These include the Old Town Hall, the Old Commercial Exchange, the old residential and market squares, Auerbach’s Cellar, and the 13th-century Thomaskirche. The skyline of the modern city now includes the university tower and new hotels and commercial and residential buildings. Within the city, former woodlands along the riverbanks have been partly converted to parks and fulfill an important recreational function.

Leipzig is a major intellectual and cultural centre. The University of Leipzig dates from 1409. Leipzig has many museums, and its academies of dramatic art, musical history, graphic arts, and bookmaking are internationally known. Among the city’s libraries are the German National Library and the Comenius Library, which is Europe’s largest library specializing in education. The University Library, the Leipzig City Library, and the City Archives are also important. Musical traditions are carried on by the Thomaner Choir, the Gewandhaus Orchestra, and the Radio Symphony Orchestra. There is also a fine opera house (1963). Pop. (2021 est.) 601,866.Lena River,  major river of Russia and the 11th longest river, or river system, in the world. It flows 2,734 miles (4,400 km) from its sources in the mountains along the western shores of Lake Baikal, in southeastern Siberia, to the mouth of its delta on the Arctic Laptev Sea. The area of the river’s drainage basin is about 961,000 square miles (2,490,000 square km).

The Lena has three main sections, each about 900 miles (1,450 km) long: the upper section from the source to the tributary Vitim River, the middle course from the Vitim to the mouth of the Aldan River, and the lower section from the Aldan to the Laptev Sea.

In the section from the headwaters to the Vitim River, the Lena flows in a deep-cut valley, the rocky and steep slopes of which rise up to 1,000 feet (300 metres) above the river. These slopes are formed on the right bank by the northern Baikal Mountains. The width of the river valley varies from 1 to 6 miles (2 to 10 km), but occasionally it narrows in ravines to only 700 feet (200 metres). The best-known ravine, named Pyany Byk (Russian: "Drunken Bull"), is situated 147 miles (237 km) below Kirensk.

In the first 110 miles (177 km) from its source, the Lena has a great number of rocky shoals, which occur as far as the tributary Kirenga River. Below the mouth of the Kirenga, water depth in the pools increases to 30 feet (9 metres), and the decreasing gradient reduces the rate of flow. In the middle course, from the mouth of the Vitim to the Aldan, the Lena becomes a large, deep river. The water supply increases, especially after the junction with the Olyokma River, and the width of the river reaches 1 mile (1.6 km). From the mouth of the Vitim to the Olyokma, the river skirts the Patom Plateau, on the right bank, forming an enormous bend; the width of the valley increases in places to 20 miles (32 km). Its slopes are gentle and green with forests, and along them run well-marked terraces formed by rivers. The floor of the valley in this section contains an extensive floodplain with scattered small lakes.

Below the Olyokma, the character of the valley changes sharply. For a stretch of about 400 miles (640 km), from Olyokminsk to Pokrovsk (60 miles [100 km] above Yakutsk), the Lena flows along the bottom of a narrow valley with sheer, broken slopes. The enormous limestone rock formations sometimes resemble the ruins of castles, or columns, or the figures of people and animals; and the area is a favourite place for tourists and rock-climbers. In the Lena’s middle section, the river receives several of its largest tributaries: in addition to the Aldan and the Vitim, it receives the Great Chuya River on the right bank and the Nyuya River on the left.

Below the mouth of the Aldan, the Lena enters the Yakut Lowland. Its valley broadens to between 12 and 16 miles (19 and 26 km), and the width of the floodplain reaches 4 to 9 miles (6 to 14 km). In this section, the river receives one of its most important tributaries, the Vilyuy River. The Lena’s course forms a great arc that trends to the northwest and then to the north around the Verkhoyansk Mountains, which lie to the east. The floodplain abounds with often marshy lakes, and the riverbed divides, forming many islands and branches. The depth is from 50 to 70 feet (15 to 20 metres), but there also are many shallow sections with sandbanks.

In the final section of the river-between the island of Zholdongo and the beginning of the delta-the Lena valley narrows to a width of about 1 mile (1.6 km) as the river flows through a gap between high hills on either side. The delta takes the shape of a rectangular peninsula that juts some 75 miles (120 km) into the Laptev Sea and is about 175 miles (280 km) wide. The islands of the delta, formed by numerous crisscrossing channels, are low-lying and covered with peat bogs.

The climatic features of the Lena River basin are determined by its location, with its upper course well inside the continent and its lower course in the Arctic. In winter the powerful Siberian anticyclone (high-pressure system) forms and dominates all of eastern Siberia. Because of the anticyclone, the winter is notable for its clear skies and lack of wind. Temperatures fall as low as −76 to −94 °F (−60 to −70 °C), with average air temperature in January ranging from −22 to −40 °F (−30 to −40 °C). In July averages range between 50 and 68 °F (10 and 20 °C). Owing to the basin’s remoteness from warm ocean water, precipitation is slight. Only in the southern mountains does the yearly total reach 24 to 28 inches (600 to 700 mm); in most of the basin it ranges between 8 and 16 inches (200 to 400 mm), and in the delta it drops to 4 inches (100 mm). Between 70 and 80 percent of the precipitation falls in the summer in the form of rain. Winters average not more than two inches of precipitation, resulting in a light snow cover.

The prolonged cold temperatures give rise to ice blisters and pingos. These are formed of groundwater that accumulates between the layers of permafrost (soil frozen permanently) over many years and layers of seasonally frozen soil. Sometimes the ice blisters disintegrate with considerable force, scattering ice blocks. The riverbeds and floodlands also have permafrost in some places.

More than 95 percent of the Lena’s water derives from melting snow and from rain; most of the remainder of the yearly flow comes from groundwater. Typical of the Lena basin are high floods (especially flash floods) in summer and very little flow in winter. Complete cessation of flow may occur with the freezing of the river to the bottom. The average annual flow of the Lena at the mouth is 579,200 cubic feet (16,400 cubic metres) per second. Maximum discharge has exceeded 4.2 million cubic feet (120,000 cubic metres) per second, and the minimum has fallen to 39,300 cubic feet (1,100 cubic metres). The total yearly volume approaches 100 cubic miles (420 cubic km). During the high-water period the water level in the upper and middle courses rises by an average of 30 to 50 feet (9 to 15 metres) and in the lower course by 60 feet (18 metres).

The highest temperature of the water in the upper course of the river is 66 °F (19 °C) and in the lower course about 57 °F (14 °C). The river is free of ice in the south for five to six months and in the north for four to five months. The breakup of ice in the spring causes significant damage to the shores: the ice floes grind the rocks, pull trees out by their roots, and carry away large sections of the banks.

The Lena discharges about 12 million tons of suspended sediment and 41 million tons of dissolved matter into the sea each year. The proportion of suspended alluvium in the water is small: even in floodwaters it does not exceed 50 to 60 grams per cubic metre. The mineralization of the water in the lower Lena during low water is 80 to 100 grams per cubic metre and in floodwaters 160 to 500 grams per cubic metre.

The vegetation of the Lena valley corresponds to the natural zones across which the river flows. The main part of the river basin is covered with taiga (swampy northern coniferous forest); in the lower reaches are found tundra and scattered forest. Spruce, cedar, birch, and poplar predominate in the moister regions. In the central valley there are some expanses of steppe grassland, a rare occurrence above latitude 60° N. Characteristic of the floodplain are peat bogs and swamps and thickets of willow, alder, and dwarf birches. In the river’s lower course appear tundra plants such as mosses and lichens, partridge grasses, whitlow grass, arctic poppy, and cotton grass.

The plankton of the Lena is scant and restricted in variety. More than 100 species of animals are found. Commercially important fish include sturgeon, salmon, roach, dace, and perch. The main concentration of these varieties is in the mouth region, where in the summer there is comparatively warm water.

Among the peoples living in the Lena basin, mainly on the banks of the river and its tributaries, Russians are most numerous, followed by the Sakha (Yakut; a Turkic-speaking people), Evenk, and Yukaghir. There are several industrial and cultural centres and farming communities. Most of the Lena River basin lies within Sakha (Yakutia) republic of northeastern Siberia, whose capital, Yakutsk, lies on the banks of the Lena.

The Lena is navigable by small boats in sections below Kachug and below Ust-Kut by larger vessels. The most important ports are Bulun, Zhigansk, Yakutsk, Vitim, Kirensk, Osetrovo, Zhigalovo, and Kachug. The major navigable tributaries are the Kirenga and Vilyuy on the left bank and the Vitim, Olyokma, and Aldan on the right bank. Timber, furs, gold, mica, industrial products, and food are the main cargoes.

Within the Yakut Lowland, various crops-barley, oats, wheat, potatoes, cucumbers, and others-are grown. Its large meadows and pastures support livestock raising. The Lena basin has large deposits of coal and natural gas, and gold has been mined for many years. In 1955, in western Sakha, rich deposits of diamonds were discovered in the Vilyuy basin. Near Olyokminsk are salt beds, and to the south of Yakutsk are deposits of iron ore and coking coal.

The hydroelectric potential of the Lena and its tributaries is enormous (estimated at some 40 million kilowatts), but only a small part of it has been exploited.

The first European exploration of the Lena was conducted by Russians at the beginning of the 17th century. In 1631 a fortress and a settlement were founded at Ust-Kut. The first scientific research was conducted by the Great Northern Expedition in 1733–42. Cartography was begun in 1910, and in 1912 the icebreakers Taymyr and Vaygach surveyed and mapped the delta. Further surveying was conducted between World Wars I and II, when a complete and detailed description was compiled. During the postwar Soviet period, research on the Lena was conducted by the Yakut branch of the Academy of Science of the U.S.S.R. and by other government bodies. More recently, there has been a concentrated effort to understand environmental changes that have taken place in this region over thousands of years.Liberty Island,  island, off the southern tip of Manhattan Island, New York, New York, U.S., in Upper New York Bay. It has an area of about 12 acres (5 hectares) and is the site of French sculptor Frédéric-Auguste Bartholdi’s "Liberty Enlightening the World" (the Statue of Liberty). The island and nearby Ellis Island constitute Statue of Liberty National Monument. Although the monument is within New Jersey waters, Liberty Island and a portion of Ellis Island are within the territorial jurisdiction of New York state.

Known to the Delaware Indians as Minnissais ("Lesser Island") and to early colonists as Great Oyster, the island was renamed for Isaac Bedloe (or Isaack Bedloo), a merchant who bought it in the 1660s. The city of New York acquired the island in 1758, and it was ceded to the state of New York in 1796 and to the federal government in 1800. Fort Wood was built there for the War of 1812, and the statue was erected within the fort in 1885–86. The statue was declared a national monument in 1924; in 1933 the National Park Service gained jurisdiction over the monument, acquiring the entire island when Fort Wood was decommissioned in 1937.Lisburn,  town, Lisburn and Castlereagh City district, eastern Northern Ireland. The town, on the River Lagan 8 miles (13 km) southwest of Belfast, was a small village known as Lisnagarvey before the English, Scots, and Welsh settled the site in the 1620s as part of the Plantation of Ulster scheme. The castle built there was besieged by native Irish in 1641 and was destroyed by fire (together with most of the town) in 1707. French Huguenot refugees and linen workers were invited by the English government to settle in Lisburn in 1698. They quickly introduced Dutch looms and reorganized the fledgling Ulster linen industry. The town became one of the United Kingdom’s most important linen manufacturing centres and is the home of the Irish Linen Centre & Lisburn Museum.  Christ Church (Anglican) Cathedral (originally built in 1623) is a fine example of church architecture of the Plantation of Ulster period.  Pop. (2001) 43,755; (2011) 45,410.…from the right, and the Little (Malaya) Ob, which receives the Northern (Severnaya) Sosva, the Vogulka, and the Synya rivers from the left. These main channels are reunited below Shuryshkary into a single stream that is up to 12 miles (19 km) wide and 130 feet (40 metres) deep; but…
Lubango,  city, southwestern Angola, about 100 miles (160 km) east of Moçâmedes (formerly Namibe), to which it is linked by rail. The city was originally established in 1885 as a settlement for colonists from the Madeira Islands. It lies at an elevation of 5,774 feet (1,760 metres) in a valley of the Huíla Plateau and is surrounded by a scenic park spreading up the mountain slopes. The city, once the major centre of Portuguese settlement in the interior of southern Angola, is built in a Portuguese style of architecture, with a cathedral, commerce hall, industrial hall, and secondary school. Lubango is served by an airport and the Moçâmedes Railway. Pop. (2014)  600,751.Marugame,  city, northwestern Kagawa ken (prefecture), northeastern Shikoku, Japan. It lies at the centre of an alluvial plain on the coast of the Inland Sea.

Marugame was founded as a castle town in 1597. It flourished from the Edo (Tokugawa) period (1603–1867) to the early Meiji period (1868–1912) as a sea terminal for pilgrims coming from the Kyōto and Ōsaka areas to worship at the Kompira Shrine in Kotohira, located about 10 miles (16 km) south of Marugame. The port’s importance declined with the opening of a rail line between Matsuyama and Takamatsu (stopping at Kotohira) in 1889 and with the subsequent development of bus and then air service linking Kotohira with major cities. The region around Marugame produces rice and barley under a well-organized irrigation system. The city’s industries manufacture chemicals, textiles, fans, and salt. Large coastal salt fields were reclaimed from the sea to stimulate further industrialization in the early 1980s. Pop. (2005) 110,085; (2010) 110,473.…perennial river rising in the Matagoro Mountains in southeastern Tanzania. Flowing eastward into the Indian Ocean at a point about 20 miles (32 km) north of Cape Delgado, the Ruvuma River forms the boundary between Tanzania and Mozambique for a length of 400 miles (650 km) from the coast and…Meizhou,  city in northeastern Guangdong sheng (province), China. It is situated on the north bank of the Mei River, a tributary of the Han River, which discharges into the sea at Shantou. A county was established there in the late 5th century. It became the seat of a prefecture (zhou) in the early 10th century and received the name Mei in 971; the prefecture was abolished in 1368. The Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12), however, established a superior prefecture (fu) there under the name Jiaying. In 1912 it reverted to county status and took the name Meixian. It received its new name, Meizhou, in 1988 and became a prefecture-level city. Meizhou, sheltered by the mountains of eastern Guangdong and not easily accessible, became the destination of the Hakka, the Chinese who migrated south from North China in the early 4th and late 9th centuries. It is now one of the main centres of Hakka culture.

Meizhou is the chief collecting centre for the produce of the Mei River basin, which lies behind the coastal ranges of Guangdong. In the 1990s a rail line was completed, linking Meizhou with Guangzhou (Canton) and Shantou; its western section is part of the line between Beijing and Kowloon (Hong Kong). Another rail line extends northeast to connect Meizhou with Fujian province at Zhangping. The city has thus emerged as the major rail as well as highway junction for northeastern Guangzhou. There are also scheduled flights from Meizhou to Guangzhou. Its industries, which developed quickly in the 1990s, consist mainly of chemicals, textiles, electronics, and building materials. Pop. (2002 est.) 236,424.Melbourne Cricket Ground,  sports stadium located in Yarra Park in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, that is the headquarters and home ground of the Melbourne Cricket Club and is the largest stadium in the Southern Hemisphere and in cricket. Australia is famously a sports-mad nation, and there is no more famous sports ground in the country than the Melbourne Cricket Ground, or the MCG, as it is affectionately known. Although little remains of its original structure, the ground embodies the history of sport in Australia.

The Melbourne Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in 1838 and was granted the land on which the club now stands in 1853 when it was forced to move from its most recent site to make way for Australia’s first steam railway line. An 1876 stand-now long gone-was reversible, allowing spectators to watch cricket at the ground in summer or Australian rules football in the park in winter. The ground has been consistently redeveloped and expanded over the years, most recently to accommodate the 2006 Commonwealth Games. The stadium currently seats more than 100,000 people.

The MCC has played a major role in Australian cricket because it was the first club formed in Victoria, and in 1856 it hosted the first match between New South Wales and Victoria. In 1862 the MCC hosted the first match against an England team and, most famously, in 1877 the first game of Test cricket between Australia and England, won by Australia by 45 runs. England won the second match by four wickets, thus drawing the series. The club also hosted the first one-day international cricket match in 1971 and the 1992 Cricket World Cup final.

In addition to cricket, the MCG is home to many other sports. The MCC was involved in drafting the first set of rules for Australian rules football in 1859 and has hosted numerous soccer matches. The stadium was also the centrepiece of the 1956 Melbourne Olympic Games. Billy Graham held crusades at the MCG, and Pope John Paul II held a mass there when he visited the city in 1986. Also, beginning in 1974, numerous rock bands have performed in this historic ground.Mills Lake is a shallow broadening of the Mackenzie River west of the village of Fort Providence. To the west the river again narrows to about a mile in width, and the current is fast at Green Island Rapids, about 12 miles (20 km) east…Mold,  town, historic and present county of Flintshire (Sir Fflint), northeastern Wales. It is situated on a small stretch of farmland between the two industrial centres of Deeside (region of the River Dee) and Wrexham.

Mold grew up around a motte-and-bailey castle that the Normans built in the 12th century. The native Christian Britons of the area defeated the Picts and Scots in an important battle waged in 430 ce; an obelisk, built in 1736 and located 1 mile (1.6 km) northwest of town, commemorates the victory. Mold has long been a market centre for the area. The 19th-century writer Daniel Owen, widely considered the father of the Welsh novel, was born in Mold, and the town’s cultural centre contains some of his original manuscripts and personal items. Mold is the administrative centre and historic county town (seat) of Flintshire. Pop. (2001) 9,568; (2011) 10,058.…appointed professor of philosophy at Monash University (1977); he became director of Monash’s Centre for Human Bioethics in 1983 and codirector of its Institute for Ethics and Public Policy in 1992. In 1999 he was appointed Ira W. DeCamp Professor of Bioethics in the University Center for Human Values at……for the Kiev-Pechersk Lavra (Monastery of the Caves), an institution that later acquired a reputation as the cradle of Russian monasticism. Reverting to his Athonite training, he sent to Constantinople (modern Istanbul) for architects to construct the new monastery complex at the mountain.Monticello,  city, seat (1895) of San Juan county, southeastern Utah, U.S. Founded in 1886 as a point of entry into the nearby Abajo Mountains and named after the Virginia estate of U.S. President Thomas Jefferson, the town grew as a centre for several ranches that hosted a thriving livestock industry. A vanadium-processing plant was built during World War II and converted to uranium production from 1949 until 1960; the former plant was the subject of an intensive federal hazardous-waste cleanup campaign throughout the 1990s. The city now serves as a tourist centre for nearby Canyonlands National Park. Inc. 1910. Pop. (2000) 1,958; (2010) 1,972.…in the vicinity, and nearby Mount Patti, the original site of Lokoja, is a 1,349-foot- (411-metre-) high mass of oolitic iron ore. Lokoja is situated on the local highway between Kabba and Ayangbe and has ferry service across the Niger River. Pop. (2016 est.) local government area, 265,400.The highest point is Mount Tarnica (4,415 feet [1,346 metres]) in the Bieszczady. The main rivers are the Vistula (Wisła), San, Wisłoka, and Wisłok. Forests take up one-third of the total area, with the most heavily forested areas occurring in the Bieszczady Mountains and the Sandomierz Basin in the……a great beech forest, the Müllerthal, as well as a sandstone area featuring an attractive ruiniform topography. The country’s eastern border with Germany is formed (successively from north to south) by the Our, Sûre, and Moselle rivers. The slopes of the Moselle River valley, carved  in chalk and calcareous clay,…Nanga Parbat,  one of the world’s tallest mountains, 26,660 feet (8,126 metres) high, situated in the western Himalayas 17 miles (27 km) west-southwest of Astor, in the Pakistani-administered sector of the Kashmir region. The mountain’s steep south wall rises nearly 15,000 feet (4,600 metres) above the valley immediately below, and the north side drops about 23,000 feet (7,000 metres) to the Indus River.

The British Alpine climber Albert F. Mummery led the first attempt to ascend the glacier- and snow-covered mountain in 1895, but he died in the attempt. At least 30 more climbers (mostly German-led) also perished on Nanga Parbat because of the severe weather conditions and frequent avalanches before the Austrian climber Hermann Buhl reached the top in 1953. The Kashmiri name Nanga Parbat is derived from the Sanskrit words nagna parvata, meaning "naked mountain." Diamir is a local name for the peak and means "king of the mountains."National Zoological Park,  zoo in Washington, D.C., that was established under the Smithsonian Institution by acts of the U.S. Congress in 1889 and 1890, when a site in the wooded valley of Rock Creek, a tributary of the Potomac River, was purchased. The Smithsonian was authorized to transfer to the zoo the animals kept in cages at the rear of the Smithsonian Institution. Various government departments, including the foreign consular service, donated specimens, and many exotic specimens have been received as gifts from foreign governments.

The zoo, which occupies about 76 hectares (187 acres), has approximately 5,000 specimens of more than 500 species. It has developed one of the world’s finest collections of small mammals and became famous for breeding pygmy hippopotamuses. Rarities include a white Bengal tiger and a pair of pandas (Mei Xiang and Tian Tian), a gift from China in 2000; the pandas Ling-Ling and Hsing-Hsing, given by the Chinese in 1972, died in 1992 and 1999, respectively. A remodeling program in the 1960s resulted in the construction of an outstanding great flight cage and new hoofed-stock areas. A hospital-research building was added in 1970. In 1975 the zoo acquired 1,280 hectares (3,150 acres) in Front Royal, Virginia, to use as a conservation and research centre. The Cheetah Conservation Station, Reptile Discovery Center, and Amazonia (a re-creation of the Amazon rainforest) were among the zoo facilities that opened in the 1990s.(in the east), Jima (south), Nekemte (west), Dese (north-central), Gonder (northwest), and Mekele (north). Addis Ababa, founded by Menilek II in 1886, brought an end to the custom of "roving capitals" practiced by earlier monarchs. After World War II, "Addis" obtained the lion’s share of investmentsNiš,  city in southeastern Serbia, on the Nišava River. The city is important for its command of the Morava–Vardar and Nišava river corridors, the two principal routes from central Europe to the Aegean. The main rail line from Belgrade and the north divides at Niš for Thessaloníki, Greece, and Sofia, Bulgaria. Niš is also the meeting point for several roads.

The ancient Roman city, Naissus, which probably succeeded a Celtic settlement, was mentioned as an important place in the 2nd century ce by Ptolemy, in his Guide to Geography. The old fortress on the right bank of the river is believed to have been built on this site. Under its walls in 269 ce the emperor Claudius II defeated an army of the Goths. Niš is the birthplace of Constantine the Great (c. 280). During migrations of the Huns in the 5th century, the town was destroyed, and the Bulgarians conquered it in the 9th century but ceded it in the 11th century to the Hungarians, from whom the Byzantine emperor took it in 1173. Toward the end of the 12th century, the town came under the Serbian Nemanjić dynasty, but in 1375 the Turks captured it from the Serbs.

Niš was recovered briefly several times, but Turkish domination lasted for 500 years, and the town became an important station on the route from Istanbul to Hungary. In the first Serbian uprising (1809), the Serbs fired their powder magazine and destroyed themselves and a large number of the enemy; in the ruins of the Turkish-built Ćele Kula (Tower of Skulls) are embedded the skulls of more than 900 of the Serbs who fell at the Battle of Čegar. The Serbian army liberated Niš in 1877, and the town was ceded to them by the Treaty of Berlin (1878). In World War I Niš was for a period the capital of Serbia. Heavy bomb damage from World War II and consequent postwar construction erased much of the town’s Turko-Byzantine style. Historical buildings include a 5th-century Byzantine crypt.

Industries include mechanical engineering, tobacco products, and electronics. The city is the seat of the University of Niš, incorporated in 1965. Niš features a national museum, a museum of public health, and the Mediana Museum, which displays and preserves archaeological finds from the area. The city’s National Theatre was established in 1887. The Niška Banja spa, just east of the city, treats patients with cardiovascular diseases. Pop. (2002) 173,724; (2011) 183,164.The rifts of the Orkney Basin developed in the Devonian Period (about 419 to 359 million years ago) on top of the thickened and unstable crust of the Caledonian orogenic belt in a manner comparable to the Quaternary rifts of Tibet (i.e., those that have appeared in the past……just southeast of Győr, is Pannonhalma Apátság, a Benedictine abbey founded in 969 by Prince Géza and chartered by Stephen I in 1001. Its 300,000-volume library includes the finest medieval archives in Hungary. The abbey was designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1996. The powerful Esterházy family built a…Paraná,  estado (state) of southern Brazil, bounded to the east by the Atlantic Ocean, on the south by the state of Santa Catarina, on the southwest by Argentina, on the west by Paraguay, on the northwest by the state of Mato Grosso do Sul, and on the north and northeast by the state of São Paulo. Paraná was named for the Paraná River (Rio Paraná), which forms its western and northwestern border. Its capital, Curitiba, is in the eastern part of the state.

After a century of gradual penetration by bands of Spanish explorers from São Paulo and by Jesuit missionaries, the territory of the present state was occupied, to a large extent, by the forces of a Portuguese emissary, Gabriel de Lara, in the 1640s. Gold was discovered at several locations in the 17th century and attracted settlers. Eventually recognized as belonging to Portugal’s sphere of influence, rather than Spain’s, the territory was attached at first to the captaincy of São Paulo and subsequently to the province of the same name. Paraná became a separate province of the Brazilian Empire in 1853 and later a state of the Brazilian Republic in 1891.

Paraná can be divided into five topographic zones, each running approximately northeast to southwest. Proceeding westward there is the coastal region, fringed with dunes and mangrove swamps and backed by the high mountain ranges of the Serra do Mar to the west. The Serro do Mar, rising to the peak of Serra da Graciosa (6,193 feet [1,888 metres]), forms a watershed between the coastal region and the first of the three successive plateaus farther westward, each lower than the one before. The first plateau, which lies at a height of between 2,700 and 3,000 feet (800 and 900 metres) above sea level, is formed mainly of crystalline rock. On the western side of the first plateau, a cuesta (an escarpment with a steep slope on one side and a gentle slope on the other) rising to heights of from 3,500 to 3,800 feet (1,050 to 1,150 metres) marks the beginning of the second plateau. A basaltic scarp with a maximum elevation of 3,800 feet rises at the western border of the second plateau, forming the eastern edge of the third plateau, which slopes westward and downward until it reaches the fringes of the Paraná River.

Three major rivers cross the second and third plateaus. Two of them, the Iguaçu and the Ivaí rivers, flow westward and are immediate tributaries of the Paraná River. The third major river is the Tibagi, which flows northward to join the Paranapanema River tributary of the Paraná. The Paraná River borderland (the state’s fifth topographic zone) has low elevations and steep gullies and is dominated by rainforest.

Paraná state, the northern region of which crosses the Tropic of Capricorn, has a moderately warm climate. Winters are dry in the northwest, while other parts receive adequate precipitation throughout the year. Summers are hot in the lower elevations and cooler-below 72 °F (22 °C)-at the higher elevations. On the coast the annual mean temperature is 70 °F (21 °C) at Paranaguá, and the rainfall reaches 81 inches (2,057 mm) annually, with the largest amounts falling in January and February.

Dense tropical rainforest extends along certain tracts of the Atlantic coast and over the uplands into the Paraná River borderland. Some areas of the state consist of treeless savanna, and there are localized bushlands.

The people of the state are largely of Portuguese-Brazilian descent. After the Portuguese, waves of other immigrants began to arrive as labourers and businessmen; these included Poles, Ukrainians, Italians, Germans, Arabs, Dutch, and Japanese. The common language is Portuguese, and the principal religion is Roman Catholicism.

The state is responsible for primary and secondary education. Among the institutions of higher learning are the Federal University of Paraná and the Catholic University of Paraná, both located in Curitiba.

Paraná is one of the richer states of Brazil. Intensively developed plantations have made Paraná one of Brazil’s chief producers of coffee, the most important centres for this crop being Umuarama, Rondon, and Londrina. Other important crops are Indian or Paraguay tea (maté), cotton, peanuts (groundnuts), and ramie (a strong, lustrous fibre capable of being spun or woven). Lumbering is also economically important.

Corn (maize) is grown for the most part around Ivaiporã, Rondon, and Toledo. Rice, cassava, potatoes, beans, oats, rye, barley, and wheat are cultivated quite widely, as are garlic, onions, tomatoes, and soybeans. Sugarcane is grown mainly around Porecatu. Fruit production includes oranges, bananas, grapes, and pineapples.

Paraná’s livestock herds have been much enlarged and improved with help from government agencies. Pigs, sheep, cattle, and horses are raised. Dairy products and wool are marketed from the northern and eastern parts of the state.

In addition to a regular output of dolomite (a type of limestone or marble), lead, iron, talc, and lime, Paraná produces coal from Venceslau Brás and cement from Rio Branco do Sul.

The main railroad in Brazil from São Paulo to the south traverses the eastern half of Paraná state; an important branchline from Ponta Grossa serves Curitiba and the Atlantic ports. Highways link the state with São Paulo to the north and Santa Catarina to the south. The rivers are generally navigable only for limited distances. Paranaguá and Antonina are the chief seaports, and Curitiba and Londrina have the chief airports.

Several towns have public libraries, the most notable at Curitiba. The theatre at Guaíra, the best known in the state, is widely known in South America; its architecture is in the modern style. Area  76,956 square miles (199,315 square km). Pop. (2022) 11,835,379.Parnaíba,  port city, northwestern Piauí estado (state), northeastern Brazil. It is located on the Igaraçu River, an outlet of the Parnaíba River, 9 miles (14 km) upstream from the Atlantic Ocean. Founded in 1761 and given city status in 1884, Parnaíba is the most important trade and distributing centre of the state’s dominant river valley. The chief products shipped from Parnaíba and its outport, Luís Correia (just to the northeast), are carnauba wax, babassu palm oil, sugar, cattle, chemicals, and hides. The city is also accessible by road and air. Pop. (2010) 145,705.…1959 the sanctuary became the Galapagos National Park. In 1978 the islands were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site, and in 1986 the Galapagos Marine Resources Reserve was created to protect the surrounding waters. The Charles Darwin Research Station on Santa Cruz (Indefatigable) Island promotes scientific studies and protects the…
Parts of Lindsey,  formerly one of three administrative divisions of the historic county of Lincolnshire, England, and approximately coterminous with the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Lindsey. It now forms the unitary authorities of North East Lincolnshire and North Lincolnshire and the districts of West Lindsey and East Lindsey in the administrative county of Lincolnshire. Farming is the principal economic activity in the two districts, while the two unitary authorities are largely industrial.Patuca River,  river in northeastern Honduras, formed southeast of Juticalpa by the merger of the Guayape and Guayambre rivers. It flows northeastward for approximately 200 miles (320 km), emerging from the highlands and crossing the Mosquito Coast to empty into the Caribbean Sea at Patuca Point. Near the river’s mouth the Tom-Tom Creek branches to empty into Brus Lagoon. The course of the Patuca is interrupted by rapids in several places, most notably Portal del Infierno ("gate of hell"). Its navigable lower course is used to float logs cut from the dense tropical rain forests through which it flows, and it serves as the main transport and communications artery for the isolated regions around its lower course.Pentecost,  island of Vanuatu, in the southwestern Pacific Ocean, about 60 miles (100 km) southeast of Espiritu Santo island. Volcanic in origin, it occupies 169 square miles (438 square km) and has a central mountain ridge that rises to 3,104 feet (946 metres) at Mount Vulmat. Many permanent streams flow down the eastern slopes into fertile valleys, where copra and coffee are cultivated. Pentecost is known for a fertility ritual performed (usually at various times from April through May) to guarantee a good yam harvest; "land divers" jump headfirst from towers up to 80 feet (24 metres) tall that are made of bush timber and vines. The divers are suspended only by vines, short and springy enough to break their fall, attached to the tower and to their ankles. Careful planning allows them to just brush the ground and survive these plunges, which are said to have inspired the modern sport of bungee jumping. The island has one hospital and has airstrips at Lonorore in the southwest and Sara in the north.Percé,  city, Gaspésie–Îles-de-la-Madeleine region, eastern Quebec province, Canada. It lies along the Gulf of St. Lawrence at the east end of the Gaspé Peninsula. First visited in 1534 by Jacques Cartier, it has been the site of a Roman Catholic mission since 1670. Percé is now a fishing port and summer resort. Offshore, but connected by a sandbar at low tide, is famed Rocher-Percé ("Pierced Rock")-a rocky island 290 feet (88 metres) high that is pierced by a 60-foot- (18-metre-) high arch; it and another nearby tourist attraction, Bonaventure Island, are bird sanctuaries. Pop. (2006) 3,419; (2011) 3,312.The Bardi and Peruzzi chapels contained cycles of St. Francis, St. John the Baptist, and St. John the Evangelist, but the frescoes were whitewashed and were not recovered until the mid-19th century, when they were damaged in the process of removing the whitewash and then heavily restored. Much…Pietarsaari,  town, western Finland, northeast of the city of Vaasa. Pietarsaari, which was formerly mainly Swedish-speaking, was founded in 1652; it became an important commercial centre because of its location on the Gulf of Bothnia. The poet Johan Ludvig Runeberg (who wrote in Swedish but is Finland’s national poet) was born there in 1804. Notable buildings include a 13th-century church, Malm House, which contains the municipal library and historical museum, and a wooden church built in 1731. Pietarsaari is a seaport and timber-export centre. Its industries include lumber and cellulose milling and the manufacture of lace, chicory, and machinery. Finland’s oldest tobacco factory was founded there in 1762, and the town still maintains tobacco-processing facilities. Pietarsaari’s outport, Leppäluoto (Swedish: Alholm), is 2.5 mi (4 km) to the north. Pop. (2000) 20,810.Portsmouth lies on Portsea Island, a narrow peninsula that separates two inlets of the English Channel: Portsmouth Harbour to the west and Langstone Harbour to the east. Portsmouth’s naval base and Royal Dockyard occupy the southwestern part of the peninsula, and Southsea lies on the peninsula’s southern tip.…Posadas,  city, capital of Misiones provincia (province), northeastern Argentina. Situated in the western corner of the province, it is bordered (north and east) by the Paraná River, which separates it from Encarnación, Paraguay.

The settlement originated as a Paraguayan trading post and river port, known as Trinchera de los Paraguayos ("Trench of the Paraguayans"). In 1869, during the War of the Triple Alliance, however, the name was changed to Trinchera de San José. In 1879 the city was named for the national hero, Gervasio Antonio Posadas (1757–1833). An administrative centre, with a substantial portion of its population working in public service, Posadas is also important for the manufacture of wood and iron products. Pop. (2001) 252,981; (2010) 324,756.Quanzhou,  port and city, eastern coastal Fujian sheng (province), China. It is situated on the north bank of the Jin River, at the head of the river’s estuary, facing the Taiwan Strait. Pop. (2002 est.) city, 497,723; (2007 est.) urban agglom., 1,463,000.

A Quanzhou prefecture was established there in 618 ce. The only sizable settlement in the present area was Nan’an county-some 12.5 miles (20 km) up the Xi River valley-which had been set up in the 6th century by the Nan (Southern) Chen regime (557–589). The present Quanzhou was founded in 700 as Wurongzhu; its name was changed to Quanzhou in 711, and it was established as a county seat; it was a convenient administrative centre for the scattered Chinese settlements in the area, under the name Jinjiang, in 718. The prefecture of Quanzhou was promoted to a superior prefecture under the Ming (1368–1644) and Qing (1644–1911/12) dynasties. After 1911, under the Chinese republic, the superior prefecture reverted to county status under its old name Jinjiang. In 1951, when Quanzhou was established as a city, all of Jinjiang county was merged into it. The Jinjiang county administration was moved and established on the south bank of the Pujiang River, though it was later named Jinjiang city within the Quanzhou urban area.

During the later Tang period (618–907), Quanzhou began to develop into a major seaport and a centre of foreign trade, rivaling Guangzhou (Canton) and Hanoi, Viet. Many Persians and Arabs settled there. During the 10th century, first under the independent Fujianese kingdom of Min (909–945), then under local warlords (944–960), and finally under the reunified empire of Song (960–1279), Quanzhou remained a centre of both foreign trade and the manufacture of oceangoing ships, which gradually enabled Chinese from Fujian to replace Arabs as chief carriers in the trade with the Middle East. Between 742 and 1162 Quanzhou’s population increased more than tenfold, and it soon outstripped Guangzhou in volume of trade. By the 13th century Quanzhou was said to have 500,000 inhabitants, including numerous Arabs, who had their own merchant quarter on the waterfront. Under the Yuan (Mongol) dynasty (1279–1368), it was China’s greatest port and was renowned throughout the world, being known to the 13th-century Venetian traveler Marco Polo and to the 14th-century Muslim traveler Ibn Baṭṭūṭah as Zaytūn-a rendering of the common name for the city, Citongcheng.

After the beginning of the 15th century, however, when the Chinese withdrew from long-range trade and when the attacks of Japanese pirates put the Ming leadership on the defensive, Quanzhou was deeply affected. At the same time, the harbour began to silt up, and in the 17th century Fuzhou and, more particularly, the nearby port of Xiamen (Amoy) began to rival it in both coastal and foreign trade. It gradually declined into a secondary coastal port, most of whose commerce was with Taiwan. Many people from this area emigrated to Taiwan, elsewhere in Southeast Asia, or overseas. Quanzhou to a large extent became economically dependent on Xiamen. Its role receded still further when Xiamen’s rail link with the interior was completed in 1956.

The city is now a regional market and commercial centre-a collection point for local agricultural products, such as sugarcane, jute, fruit, and peanuts (groundnuts), and a distribution centre for manufactures imported through Xiamen. There is some small-scale industry, including the manufacture of porcelain, farm implements, and fertilizer, and food processing, such as sugar refining, flour milling, and oil extraction. Since the 1980s Quanzhou has attracted many investors from the overseas Chinese and Taiwanese communities, and the city has experienced rapid economic development. The city is now linked with Xiamen by rail through Zhangping and via an express highway that provides quicker access to the major cities in the province. Its airport at Jinjiang has regular flights to major cities on the mainland as well as to Hong Kong.

Quanzhou retains many relics of its medieval prosperity, including a large number of stone structures and statuary; notable is an 11th-century stone bridge that spans the Jin River. Twin stone pagodas (1228–38) follow the design of wooden ones first built in 865 and 916; a large statue of a Daoist saint dates to the Song period. An ancient mosque and the tombs of early Muslim missionaries also are preserved. A wooden ship, dating from the 12th or 13th century and excavated in 1974, occupies a special exhibition hall in the city. Tourism has become important to the local economy.…possible), the chief town was Rhapta, which may lie buried in the Rufiji delta of present-day Tanzania. Here the situation differed somewhat from that in the north, and, though tortoiseshell and rhinoceros horn were exported from there-as were quantities of ivory and coconut oil-no mention is made of slaves. Rhapta’s…Two large natural areas, Ríos Blanco y Negro Wildlife Reserve and Noel Kempff Mercado National Park-the latter designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2000-lie to the east of the city.River Teviot,  tributary of the River Tweed, southern Scotland. Its valley, Teviotdale, constitutes a large part of the historic county of Roxburghshire. The river, rich in trout, flows northeast past Hawick to join the Tweed at Kelso. The alluvial haughs and gravel terraces of the valley floor are improved farmland, but much of the basin consists of steep, rounded hills used for rough sheep grazing.Ryukyu Islands,  archipelago, extending some 700 miles (1,100 km) southwestward from the southern Japanese island of Kyushu to northeastern Taiwan. The archipelago defines the boundary between the East China Sea (west) and the Philippine Sea (east). With a total land area of 1,193 square miles (3,090 square km), the Ryukyus consist of 55 islands and islets divided into three major groups: the Amami island chain in the north, the central Okinawa islands, and the Sakishima islands in the south. Administratively, the Ryukyus are part of Japan, the Amami group constituting a southern extension of Kyushu’s Kagoshima prefecture (ken) and the Okinawa and Sakishima islands making up Okinawa prefecture.

The two largest islands are Okinawa (465 square miles [1,204 square km]) and Amami Great Island (275 square miles [712 square km]). The larger islands are generally volcanic in origin and have mountainous terrain, while most of the smaller islands are coralline and relatively flat. The climate is subtropical with considerable rainfall, and the archipelago is subject to annual typhoons.

The people of the islands are thought to be descendants of Japanese and Southeast Asians who migrated to the Ryukyus in prehistoric times. The Ryukyuan language, which is classified with Japanese, consists of three dialect groups corresponding to the main island clusters. There is no mutual intelligibility between these dialects and Japanese nor among the dialect groups. Japanese is commonly spoken by the majority of the Ryukyuans, but local dialects are also used.

Culturally, the Ryukyuans have been subjected to both Japanese and Chinese influence. Nonetheless, they developed indigenous musical forms and, on Okinawa, a local textile craft. In ancient times the islands formed an independent kingdom. Chinese and Japanese sovereignty were successively forced on the archipelago from the 14th to the 19th century, and in 1879 the Ryukyus became an integral part of Japan.

After the defeat of Japan (1945) in World War II, the United States took control of the islands. The military government was replaced in 1951 by a civil administration based in Naha (on Okinawa), the islands’ largest city. The chief executive, who originally was appointed by the U.S. high commissioner, was elected by the legislature in 1966. His election was made popular two years later. By terms of the treaty ending World War II (1952), the United States recognized Japan’s residual sovereignty over the Ryukyus, and the Amami island chain was returned in 1953. Following a second treaty signed in 1971, the remaining islands were returned in 1972. The United States continues to maintain a large number of military installations and thousands of troops on Okinawa Island.

The Ryukyus are primarily rural. Agriculture is the dominant occupation, with sweet potatoes and rice the staple crops. Sugar and canned pineapples are among the leading exports. Tuna fishing is increasingly important. Traditional industries include lacquer and pottery manufacture; newer enterprises produce industrial compounds. Tourism has become a major component of the economy. Okinawa University, Kokusai University, and the University of the Ryukyus are all located on Okinawa.Santa Maria Island,  southeasternmost island of the Azores archipelago (a part of Portugal), in the North Atlantic Ocean. It has an area of 37 square miles (97 square km). Its economy is based chiefly on fishing and cattle raising, and cereals and vines are cultivated. On the island’s western plateau is an important international airport (originally constructed as a U.S. air base in 1944) for transatlantic flights.

The island’s capital, Vila do Porto, founded in the 1430s, is the oldest town in the Azores; it has a 15th-century parish church and a commemorative stela, dedicated in 1432 to "the discoverers." Christopher Columbus, returning from his first voyage to America in 1493, called at what is now the hamlet of Anjos on the northern coast.Selangor,   region of western West Malaysia (Malaya), occupying part of a coastal alluvial plain on the Strait of Malacca. In 1974, a 94-square-mile (243-square-kilometre) portion of Selangor, centring on Kuala Lumpur, was designated a wilayapersekutuan (federal territory). Selangor’s history and economic development have been closely linked with two rivers, the Kelang and the Langat, which were the main settlement routes for Malays and immigrant Chinese.

One of the original Negeri Sembilan ("Nine States") under the rule of old Malacca, Selangor became an independent state (18th century) ruled by Buginese from Makasar in the Celebes. In the late 19th century Chinese tin miners, mainly from Singapore, arrived, and an ensuing civil war in their jungle camps led to British intervention, culminating in protectorate status (1874) and membership in the Federated Malay States (1896) and the Federation of Malaya (1948). Although Chinese and Indians outnumber Malays, Selangor has been the focus of Malay nationalist politics and attendant communal rivalries.

A 20-mile (32-kilometre) railway built between Kuala Lumpur and Klang (the sultan’s residence) about 1890 was the beginning of an extensive series of rail and road links with Singapore and Pinang that were constructed to handle the increasing output of rubber and tin. Port Swettenham, now Port Kelang (q.v.), was developed beside a broad channel on the delta below Klang (now Kelang) to handle bulky commodities. Other important towns include Kuala Selangor, Kuala Kubu Baharu, and Kajang.

The region’s modern economy is broad-based, with tin, coconuts, and rubber as major products. Subsistence paddy (rice) is grown in the upland valleys and at Tanjung Karang, a swampy northern coastal strip. Pineapples, coffee, rice, tea, cocoa, and palm products are significant crops. Coal is mined at Batu Arang. Industrial and commercial development is concentrated in a sector between Kuala Lumpur-Petaling Jaya and Port Kelang.Senegal,  country in western Africa. Located at the westernmost point of the continent and served by multiple air and maritime travel routes, Senegal is known as the "Gateway to Africa." The country lies at an ecological boundary where semiarid grassland, oceanfront, and tropical rainforest converge; this diverse environment has endowed Senegal with a wide variety of plant and animal life. It is from this rich natural heritage that the country’s national symbols were chosen: the baobab tree and the lion.

The region today known as Senegal was long a part of the ancient Ghana and Djolof kingdoms and an important node on trans-Saharan caravan routes. It was also an early point of European contact and was contested by England, France, Portugal, and the Netherlands before ultimately coming under French control in the late 19th century. It remained a colony of France until 1960, when, under the leadership of the writer and statesman Léopold Senghor, it gained its independence-first as part of the short-lived Mali Federation and then as a wholly sovereign state.

Although Senegal traditionally has been dependent on peanuts (groundnuts), the government has had some success with efforts to diversify the country’s economy. Even so, the country suffered an economic decline in the 20th century, owing in some measure to external forces such as the fall in value of the African Financial Community (Communauté Financière Africaine; CFA) franc and the high cost of debt servicing, as well as to internal factors such as a rapidly growing population and widespread unemployment.

Almost two-fifths of Senegal’s people are Wolof, members of a highly stratified society whose traditional structure includes a hereditary nobility and a class of musicians and storytellers called griots. Contemporary Senegalese culture, especially its music and other arts, draws largely on Wolof sources, but the influences of other Senegalese groups (among them the Fulani, the Serer, the Diola, and the Malinke) are also evident. Wolof predominate in matters of state and commerce as well, and this dominance has fueled ethnic tension over time as less-powerful groups vie for parity with the Wolof majority.

The most important city in Senegal is its capital, Dakar. This lively and attractive metropolis, located on Cape Verde Peninsula along the Atlantic shore, is a popular tourist destination. Although the government announced plans to eventually move the capital inland, Dakar will remain one of Africa’s most important harbours and an economic and cultural centre for West Africa as a whole.

Senegal is home to several internationally renowned musicians and artists. Other aspects of Senegalese culture have traveled into the larger world as well, most notably Senghor’s espousal of Negritude-a literary movement that flourished in the 1930s, ’40s, and ’50s and that emphasized African values and heritage. Through events such as the World Festival of Negro Arts, first held in Senegal in 1966, and institutions such as the Fundamental Institute of Black Africa (Institut Fondamental d’Afrique Noire; IFAN) and the Gorée Island World Heritage site, Senegal honours Senghor’s dictum "We must learn to absorb and influence others more than they absorb or influence us."Serpens, (Latin: "Serpent")  the only constellation divided into two parts, Serpens Caput (Latin: "Head of the Serpent") and Serpens Cauda (Latin: "Tail of the Serpent"). The two parts represent the serpent held by the constellation of Ophiuchus. Serpens Caput is located at about 16 hours right ascension and 10° north in declination; Serpens Cauda is at about 18 hours right ascension and 10° south in declination. Its brightest star is Unukalhai (from the Arabic for "the serpent’s neck"), with a magnitude of 2.7.Shanhaiguan,  former town, eastern Hebei sheng (province), northeastern China. It lies on the coast of the Bo Hai (Gulf of Chihli) just northeast of Qinhuangdao, into which it was incorporated in 1954.

Until the 17th century the area was a strategic site that played a major role in the defense of the Beijing area from the northeastern approach. Shanhaiguan ("Pass Between the Mountains and the Sea") was the place at which the route from Beijing into Manchuria (Northeast China) passed through a narrow defile along the coast and where, at the same time, the Great Wall of China reached the coast. A pass (Linyuguan, or Yuguan) was built there in 583 during the Sui dynasty (581–618).

In 1381, early in the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), the old, deteriorated pass was replaced with a new one and was given the name Shanhaiguan. During the Qing dynasty (1644–1911/12), a county seat called Linyu was set up there (1737). It lost its strategic status in the 20th century, however, when the rise of nearby Qinhuangdao took away much of its importance while the Manchurian trade, which had previously passed through Shanhaiguan to Beijing, was diverted to Dalian (Dairen), in Liaoning province. Shanhaiguan’s capture by Japanese forces operating in southern Manchuria (January 1932) placed that entire region under Japanese control and helped set the strategic stage for the establishment of the Japanese-sponsored puppet regime of Manchukuo.

Shanhaiguan has been a district within the city of Qinhuangdao since 1954. The local economy is based on shipbuilding; the manufacture of bridge-construction components, building materials, machinery, and chemicals; and food processing. Shanhaiguan Pass, referred to as "the first pass under heaven" in China, plus other famous scenic spots in the surrounding area, has made Shanhaiguan a popular tourist destination. Both a railway and an expressway from Beijing to Shenyang (Liaoning province) pass through the area. A regional airport provides air service to major cities in the country.Sierra,  county, southwestern New Mexico, U.S. Sierra county is in the Mexican Highland section of the Basin and Range Province. Its irregular western border is the Black Range, including Hillsboro and Reeds peaks, both rising to more than 10,000 feet (3,000 metres). The Rio Grande, including large impoundments at Caballo and Elephant Butte reservoirs, flows southward through the centre of the county. Immediately east of the reservoirs are the Sierra Caballo and Fra Cristobal Range; the Jornada del Muerto desert separates those mountains from the San Andreas Mountains in the northeast. Sierra county includes Gila National Forest, Aldo Leopold Wilderness, and Percha Dam, Caballo Lake, and Elephant Butte Lake state parks.

For centuries Indians visited the hot springs at Truth or Consequences for their healing powers. Apaches roamed the Sierra county region by the time Francisco Vázquez de Coronado’s expedition arrived in 1540. The Spanish first attempted to mine gold in the Sierra Caballo during the 17th century, and a gold and silver rush came to the Black Range in 1877. The county was established in 1884; the booming mining town of Hillsboro became the county seat.

Truth or Consequences, now the county seat, was a popular retirement town in the late 20th century. Government expenditures, tourism, and agriculture (cattle, milk, vegetables, chiles) also are important to the economy. Area 4,181 square miles (10,828 square km). Pop. (2000) 13,270; (2010) 11,988.…undergone reconstruction and houses the Soler y Palet Museum, famous for its medieval paintings and sculpture and for its collection of Catalan ceramics. Also in Terrassa is the Biosca Museum of historic textiles and a school for textile engineers.Sweden,  country located on the Scandinavian Peninsula in northern Europe. The name Sweden was derived from the Svear, or Suiones, a people mentioned as early as 98 ce by the Roman author Tacitus. The country’s ancient name was Svithiod. Stockholm has been the permanent capital since 1523.

Sweden occupies the greater part of the Scandinavian Peninsula, which it shares with Norway. The land slopes gently from the high mountains along the Norwegian frontier eastward to the Baltic Sea. Geologically, it is one of the oldest and most stable parts of the Earth’s crust. Its surface formations and soils were altered by the receding glaciers of the Pleistocene Epoch (about 2,600,000 to 11,700 years ago). Lakes dot the fairly flat landscape, and thousands of islands form archipelagoes along more than 1,300 miles (2,100 km) of jagged, rocky coastline. Like all of northwestern Europe, Sweden has a generally favourable climate relative to its northerly latitude owing to moderate southwesterly winds and the warm North Atlantic Current.

The country has a 1,000-year-long continuous history as a sovereign state, but its territorial expanse changed often until 1809. Today it is a constitutional monarchy with a well-established parliamentary democracy that dates from 1917. Swedish society is ethnically and religiously very homogeneous, although recent immigration has created some social diversity. Historically, Sweden rose from backwardness and poverty into a highly developed postindustrial society and advanced welfare state with a standard of living and life expectancy that rank among the highest in the world.

Sweden long ago disavowed the military aggressiveness that once involved its armies deeply in Europe’s centuries of dynastic warfare. It has chosen instead to play a balancing role among the world’s conflicting ideological and political systems. It is for this reason that Swedish statesmen have often been sought out to fill major positions in the United Nations. At peace since 1814, Sweden has followed the doctrine, enunciated in every document on foreign policy since World War II, of "nonalignment in peace aiming at neutrality in war."

Sweden lies to the southwest of Finland. A long coastline forms the country’s eastern border, extending along the Gulf of Bothnia and the Baltic Sea; a narrow strait, known as The Sound (Öresund), separates Sweden from Denmark in the south. A shorter coastline along the Skagerrak and Kattegat straits forms Sweden’s border to the southwest, and Norway lies to the west. Sweden extends some 1,000 miles (1,600 km) to the north and south and 310 miles (500 km) to the east and west.

The country is traditionally divided into three regions: to the north is Norrland, the vast mountain and forest region; in central Sweden is Svealand, an expanse of lowland in the east and highland in the west; and in the south is Götaland, which includes the Småland highlands and, at the southern extremity, the small but rich plains of Skåne. In the far north the region of Lappland overlaps Norrland and northern Finland.

Norrland is the largest and most sparsely populated of the regions, covering some three-fifths of the country. The region features an undulating surface of rounded hills and mountains, large lakes, and extensive river valleys. To the west lie the Kölen (Kjølen; Scandinavian) Mountains, through which runs the border demarcating Sweden and Norway. This range is characterized by numerous glaciers, the southernmost of which is on Helags Mountain (Helagsfjället), near the Norwegian border. At the region’s far northern edge, north of the Arctic Circle, are Sweden’s highest peaks: Mount Kebne (Kebnekaise), which is 6,926 feet (2,111 metres) in elevation, and Mount Sarek (Sarektjåkkå), which rises 6,854 feet (2,089 metres), in the magnificent Sarek National Park.

The interior of southern Sweden, Småland, is a wooded upland with elevations of 980 to 1,300 feet (300 to 400 metres). A region of poor and stony soils, Småland has been cultivated through the ages with some difficulty, as evidenced by the enormous mounds of stone cleared from the land. More recently the area has been characterized by flourishing small factories.

Except for a stretch of scenic "high coast," the Bothnian coastal plain is low-lying and stretches from Norrland into Svealand. Most of the fairly level surface of eastern Svealand and northern Götaland was pressed below sea level by glaciers, leaving a landscape of fragmented bedrock, fertile clayey plains, numerous lakes, and sandy ridges. Today these are intermingled with mixed forests and farmland. Sweden’s landscape changes from the hills of Småland to the fertile plains of Skåne, which is physiographically and economically more similar to Denmark than to the rest of Sweden. This is Sweden’s oldest settled and most densely populated agricultural area.

The Swedish coastline is typically rocky, with hundreds of small, sometimes wooded islands. Ground by glacial ice in the same direction, they have a common rounded shape. This type of coast, known as skärgård, is found in both the east and the west, especially around Stockholm and Gothenburg. Off the southern coast in the Baltic, the large, flat islands of Öland and Gotland are outcropping layers of sandstone and limestone.

The country’s chief rivers originate in the mountains of Norrland, mostly flowing southeastward with many falls and rapids and emptying into the Gulf of Bothnia or the Baltic Sea. The longest, however, is the Klar-Göta River, which rises in Norway and flows 447 miles (719 km), reaching Lake Väner (Vänern) and continuing southward out of the lake’s southern end to the North Sea; along its southernmost course are the famous falls of Trollhättan. The Muonio and Torne rivers form the frontier with Finland, and in the south the Dal River marks the transition to Svealand. The rivers, except in the far north, where they are protected, are sources of hydroelectric power.

In Svealand are Sweden’s largest lakes, including Lakes Väner, 2,181 square miles (5,650 square km); Vätter (Vättern), 738 square miles (1,911 square km); and Mälar (Mälaren), 440 square miles (1,139 square km). The shores of Lakes Siljan and Storsjön and the river valleys support agriculture.

The dominant soil of Sweden is till, formed under glacial ice. Till that comes from the archaic bedrock of granites and gneisses forms a poor soil, and forestry and polluted (acid) rain add to its acidification. On the other hand, small areas of clayey till from younger sedimentary limestone, scattered mainly in southern Sweden, form brown earth, providing agricultural soils of high fertility. In addition, vast areas of central Sweden are covered by heavy and fertile sea-bottom clays raised out of the sea by postglacial land uplift. One-fifth of the country, especially in rainy southwestern Sweden and the cold far north, is covered by marshland and peat.…are crossed by the important Tanggula Pass, the main route that links Lhasa (capital of Tibet) and the southern Tibetan region to the Qaidam (Tsaidam) Basin and beyond in Qinghai to the north and east. Mineral surveys have revealed deposits of iron ore, hard coal, graphite, and asbestos in the……University of Kyiv (now the Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv), which had been established in 1834.
Tashi Chho dzong (fortress, or castle), the traditional fortified monastery that has been remodeled and extended to house the offices of the royal government, is one of the finest specimens of traditional Bhutanese architecture. Terraced fields around the royal palace indicate the high priority given…
The Temple of a Thousand Columns (also called Koneswaram Temple), located at the extremity of the peninsula, came into use as a Hindu temple sometime in the 7th century or earlier. The first Europeans to occupy the town were the Portuguese in the 17th century; they…the Cumbraes,  two islands in the Firth of Clyde, Scotland. They lie between the island of Bute to the west and the coast of the Scottish mainland to the east. Administratively, the islands are part of the North Ayrshire council area on the mainland, but they belong to the historic county of Buteshire. Great Cumbrae, which measures 4.5 square miles (11.5 square km), is composed of ancient sandstone and reaches an elevation of 415 feet (126 metres). It is well farmed, and the holiday resort of Millport is popular with tourists for its beaches, sailing and cycling opportunities, and marine biological station and museum. The collegiate church, built in 1849, became the Episcopal cathedral of Argyll and the Isles in 1876. Little Cumbrae measures 1 square mile (2.6 square km) and is separated from its larger neighbour by the Tan, a strait 0.5 mile (0.9 km) wide. It reaches an elevation of 406 feet (124 metres). Nearly all of the population of the two islands lives in Millport. Pop. (2001) Great Cumbrae, 1,434; (2011) Great Cumbrae, 1,376. …Hyde Park portion is called the Serpentine. The lake is used for boating in the summer and skating in the winter. In the park’s northeastern corner, near Marble Arch, is Speakers’ Corner, which has long been a centre of free speech for soapbox orators. Also in the park are the…Tirunelveli,  city, southern Tamil Nadu state, southeastern India. It lies along the Tambraparni River slightly upstream from the town of Palayankottai, with which it is now merged administratively. Its name is derived from the Tamil words tiru ("holy"), nel ("paddy"), and veli ("fence"), referring to a legend that the god Shiva protected a devotee’s rice crop there. Tirunelveli was a commercial centre during the Pandya dynasty. With electricity supplied from the Papanasam Dam on the Tambraparni River, it has become an industrial city specializing in the manufacture of textiles, cigars, and jewelry, and it has motor workshops. It is the site of Manonmaniam Sundaranar University (1990).

Tirunelveli lies in the fertile alluvial valley of the Tambraparni River, which rises in the Western Ghats mountain range and flows eastward to eventually empty into the Gulf of Mannar. The Tambraparni provides irrigation water for crops of rice and cotton. The locality’s chief large-scale industry is cotton milling. The area has been an important centre for Christian missionary activities among the local population since the Jesuit missionary St. Francis Xavier began proselytizing there in 1542. Pop. (2001) city, 411,831; (2011) city, 473,637.…time that a waterway, the Tonghui Canal, was dug and connected to the Grand Canal, so that boats transporting tribute rice from the provinces south of the Yangtze could sail into one of the new lakes inside the city. Dadu, which had magnificent imperial palaces and treasures drawn from every…Tulle,  town, capital of Corrèze département, Nouvelle-Aquitaine région, central France. It is situated on the western edge of the upland block known as the Massif Central. The town is spread out along the deep, narrow Corrèze valley, and its streets climb steep hill slopes. Only the 12th-century nave and the belfry remain of its ancient cathedral of Saint-Martin, part of which collapsed in 1796. The town is the site of a national firearms factory. Its name was given to what was once an important regional industry, the making of tulle, a fine silk net. Present-day industries include the manufacture of automotive parts and metal products. Tulle is the administrative seat of the département as well as a centre of tourism and commerce. Pop. (1999) 15,553; (2014 est.) 14,325.Turkey,  country that occupies a unique geographic position, lying partly in Asia and partly in Europe. Throughout its history it has acted as both a barrier and a bridge between the two continents.

Turkey is situated at the crossroads of the Balkans, Caucasus, Middle East, and eastern Mediterranean. It is among the larger countries of the region in terms of territory and population, and its land area is greater than that of any European state. Nearly all of the country is in Asia, comprising the oblong peninsula of Asia Minor-also known as Anatolia (Anadolu)-and, in the east, part of a mountainous region sometimes known as the Armenian Highland. The remainder-Turkish Thrace (Trakya)-lies in the extreme southeastern part of Europe, a tiny remnant of an empire that once extended over much of the Balkans.

The country has a north-south extent that ranges from about 300 to 400 miles (480 to 640 km), and it stretches about 1,000 miles from west to east. Turkey is bounded on the north by the Black Sea, on the northeast by Georgia and Armenia, on the east by Azerbaijan and Iran, on the southeast by Iraq and Syria, on the southwest and west by the Mediterranean Sea and the Aegean Sea, and on the northwest by Greece and Bulgaria. The capital is Ankara, and its largest city and seaport is Istanbul.

Of a total boundary length of some 4,000 miles (6,440 km), about three-fourths is maritime, including coastlines along the Black Sea, the Aegean, and the Mediterranean, as well as the narrows that link the Black and Aegean seas. These narrows-which include the Bosporus, the Sea of Marmara, and the Dardanelles-are known collectively as the Turkish straits; Turkey’s control of the straits, the only outlet from the Black Sea, has been a major factor in its relations with other states. Most of the islands along the Aegean coast are Greek; only the islands of Gökçeada and Bozcaada remain in Turkish hands. The maritime boundary with Greece has been a source of dispute between the two countries on numerous occasions since World War II.

A long succession of political entities existed in Asia Minor over the centuries. Turkmen tribes invaded Anatolia in the 11th century ce, founding the Seljuq empire; during the 14th century the Ottoman Empire began a long expansion, reaching its peak during the 17th century. The modern Turkish republic, founded in 1923 after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, is a nationalist, secular, parliamentary democracy. After a period of one-party rule under its founder, Mustafa Kemal (Atatürk), and his successor, Turkish governments since the 1950s have been produced by multiparty elections based on universal adult suffrage.

Turkey is a predominantly mountainous country, and true lowland is confined to the coastal fringes. About one-fourth of the surface has an elevation above 4,000 feet (1,200 metres), and less than two-fifths lies below 1,500 feet (460 metres). Mountain crests exceed 7,500 feet (2,300 metres) in many places, particularly in the east, where Turkey’s highest mountain, Mount Ararat (Ağrı), reaches 16,945 feet (5,165 metres) close to the borders with Armenia and Iran. In the southeast the Uludoruk Peak reaches 15,563 feet (4,744 metres); though further west, the Demirkazık Peak (12,320 feet [3,755 metres]) and Mount Aydos (11,414 feet [3,479 metres]) are also significant peaks. Steep slopes are common throughout the country, and flat or gently sloping land makes up barely one-sixth of the total area. These relief features affect other aspects of the physical environment, producing climates often much harsher than might be expected for a country of Turkey’s latitude and reducing the availability and productivity of agricultural land. Structurally, the country lies within the geologically young folded-mountain zone of Eurasia, which in Turkey trends predominantly east to west. The geology of Turkey is complex, with sedimentary rocks ranging from Paleozoic to Quaternary, numerous intrusions, and extensive areas of volcanic material. Four main regions can be identified: the northern folded zone, the southern folded zone, the central massif, and the Arabian platform.

The northern folded zone comprises a series of mountain ridges, increasing in elevation toward the east, that occupy a belt about 90 to 125 miles (145 to 200 km) wide immediately south of the Black Sea. The system as a whole is referred to as the Pontic Mountains (Doğukaradeniz Dağları). In the west the system has been fractured by the faulting that produced the Turkish straits; in Thrace the Ergene lowlands are among the largest in the country, and the main mountain range-the Yıldız (Istranca)-reaches only 3,379 feet (1,030 metres). Lowlands also occur to the south of the Sea of Marmara and along the lower Sakarya River east of the Bosporus. High ridges trending east-west rise abruptly from the Black Sea coast, and the coastal plain is thus narrow, opening out only in the deltas of the Kızıl and Yeşil rivers. These rivers break through the mountain barrier in a zone of weakness where summits are below 2,000 feet (600 metres), dividing the Pontic Mountains into western and eastern sections. In the western section, between the Sakarya and Kızıl rivers, there are four main ridges: the Küre, Bolu, Ilgaz, and Köroğlu mountains. East of the Yeşil the system is higher, narrower, and steeper. Less than 50 miles from the coast, peaks rise to more than 10,000 feet (3,000 metres), with a maximum elevation of 12,917 feet (3,937 metres) in the Kaçkar range. Separated by the narrow trough of the Kelkit and Çoruh river valleys stands a second ridge that rises above 8,000 feet (2,400 metres).

The southern folded zone occupies the southern third of the country, from the Aegean to the Gulf of Iskenderun, from which it extends to the northeast and east around the northern side of the Arabian platform. Over most of its length, the Mediterranean coastal plain is narrow, but there are two major lowland embayments. The Antalya Plain extends inland some 20 miles (30 km) from the Gulf of Antalya; the Adana Plain, measuring roughly 90 by 60 miles (145 by 100 km), comprises the combined deltas of the Seyhan and Ceyhan rivers. The mountain system falls into two main parts. West of Antalya a complex series of ridges with a north-south trend reaches 6,500 to 8,200 feet (2,000 to 2,500 metres), but the most prominent feature is the massive Taurus (Toros) mountain system, running parallel to the Mediterranean coast and extending along the southern border. There crest lines are often above 8,000 feet (2,400 metres), and several peaks exceed 11,000 feet (3,400 metres).

In the eastern third of the country, the northern and southern fold systems converge to produce an extensive area of predominantly mountainous terrain, with pockets of relatively level land confined to valleys and enclosed basins, as are found around Malatya, Elazığ, and Muş.…is drained by the Belait, Tutong, and Brunei rivers in the western segment and by the Pandaruan and Temburong rivers in the east; all flow generally northward to the South China Sea. The Belait is the largest river in the country. The soils of Brunei are deeply weathered, highly leached,…United Arab Emirates,  federation of seven emirates along the eastern coast of the Arabian Peninsula.

The largest of these emirates, Abu Dhabi (Abū Ẓaby), which comprises more than three-fourths of the federation’s total land area, is the centre of its oil industry and borders Saudi Arabia on the federation’s southern and eastern borders. The port city of Dubai, located at the base of the mountainous Musandam Peninsula, is the capital of the emirate of Dubai (Dubayy) and is one of the region’s most vital commercial and financial centres, housing hundreds of multinational corporations in a forest of skyscrapers. The smaller emirates of Sharjah (Al-Shāriqah), ʿAjman (ʿAjmān), Umm al-Quwain (Umm al-Qaywayn), and Ras al-Khaimah (Raʾs al-Khaymah) also occupy the peninsula, whose protrusion north toward Iran forms the Strait of Hormuz linking the Persian Gulf to the Gulf of Oman. The federation’s seventh member, Fujairah (Al-Fujayrah), faces the Gulf of Oman and is the only member of the union with no frontage along the Persian Gulf.

Historically the domain of individual Arab clans and families, the region now comprising the emirates also has been influenced by Persian culture owing to its close proximity to Iran, and its porous maritime borders have for centuries invited migrants and traders from elsewhere. In the 18th century, Portugal and the Netherlands extended their holdings in the region but retreated with the growth of British naval power there; following a series of truces with Britain in the 19th century, the emirates united to form the Trucial States (also called Trucial Oman or the Trucial Sheikhdoms). The states gained autonomy following World War II (1939–45), when the trucial states of Bahrain and Qatar declared independent statehood. The rest were formally united in 1971, with the city of Abu Dhabi serving as the capital. The stability of the federation has since been tested by rivalries between the families governing the larger states of Abu Dhabi and Dubai, though external events such as the Persian Gulf War (1990–91) and an ongoing territorial dispute with Iran have served to strengthen the emirates’ political cohesion.

The emirates comprise a mixed environment of rocky desert, coastal plains and wetlands, and waterless mountains. The seashore is a haven for migratory waterfowl and draws birdwatchers from all over the world; the country’s unspoiled beaches and opulent resorts also have drawn international travelers. Standing at a historic and geographic crossroads and made up of diverse nationalities and ethnic groups, the United Arab Emirates present a striking blend of ancient customs and modern technology, of cosmopolitanism and insularity, and of wealth and want. The rapid pace of modernization of the emirates prompted travel writer Jonathan Raban to note of the capital: "The condition of Abu Dhabi was so evidently mint that it would not have been surprising to see adhering to the buildings bits of straw and polystyrene from the crates in which they had been packed."…University (1974), in Islamabad, the University of Peshawar (1950), and the University of Karachi (1950). Other universities established during the 20th century include Quaid-i-Azam University (1967; called the University of Islamabad until 1976), the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Agricultural University in Peshawar (1981), the International Islamic University in Islamabad (1980), the Aga…
Užice,  town, southwestern Serbia. It lies along the Djetinja River and the Sarajevo-Čačak-Belgrade railway line.

A medieval town of strategic importance, Užice was the headquarters for the Partisan army in autumn 1941. It was renamed in honour of Josip Broz Tito in 1946 but reverted to its old name in 1992. The Museum of the Insurrection is installed in the building that served as headquarters for Tito’s Partisans.

The town is a centre for a nonferrous metals and machinery industry and also for a livestock-breeding and fruit-growing region. The town’s copper and aluminum mills manufactures include rolled and drawn products of copper, aluminum, and their alloys. Pop. (2002) 54,717; (2011) 52,646.Ventspils,  city and port, western Latvia. It lies at the mouth of the Venta River on the Baltic Sea coast. A settlement existed there in the 2nd millennium bc, and by the 10th century ad it was inhabited by Wends (a Slavic people). In 1242 the Teutonic Knights built a castle there, and in 1378 town status was conferred. A shipyard was established in 1642, and in 1904 Ventspils was reached by the railway. Its port is ice-free and is a major site for the export of oil and chemicals. It has a pipeline from the Volga-Urals oil field (Russia), a fishing fleet, and a large fish cannery. Pop. (2008 prelim.) 43,299.…the deep cleft of the Verdon Canyon in France, the crystalline peaks of the Mercantour Massif, and the glacier-covered dome of Mont Blanc, which at 15,771 feet (4,807 metres) is the highest peak in the Alps. Rivers from these ranges flow west into the Rhône and east into the Po.Victory Peak,  mountain in the eastern Kakshaal (Kokshaal-Tau) Range of the Tien Shan, on the frontier of Kyrgyzstan and China. It was first identified in 1943 as the tallest peak (24,406 feet [7,439 metres]) in the Tien Shan range and the second highest peak in what was then the Soviet Union; it is now the highest peak in Kyrgyzstan. Its name commemorates the Allied victory in World War II. An enormous dome-shaped mountain, heavily glaciated and frequently wreathed in clouds, it was first climbed in 1956 by Soviet alpinists.Vidzeme,  plateau region of central Latvia, roughly corresponding to the historic state of Livonia. It is a hilly, irregular, partially terraced morainic area, dotted with many small morainal lakes. It reaches an elevation of 1,020 feet (311 m) at Mount Gaiziņš and is drained to the west by the Gauja River, which flows into the Gulf of Riga about 12 miles (20 km) north of Riga after a course of 286 miles (460 km).These fault zones (particularly the Wasatch Fault in central Utah and the San Andreas zone in California) remain active today and are the source of most of the damaging earthquakes in North America. The Andean mountains were uplifted during the Neogene as a result of subduction of the South Pacific…Washington,  county, northern Maryland, U.S., bounded by Pennsylvania to the north and the Potomac River (which constitutes the border with Virginia and West Virginia) to the south and southwest. The county lies in the Cumberland Valley between the Allegheny (west) and the Blue Ridge (east) mountains; the Appalachian National Scenic Trail follows the crest line of the Blue Ridge.

The county was created in 1776 and named for George Washington. Hagerstown, the county seat, is located north of the Antietam National Battlefield, site of the Battle of Antietam (Sept. 17, 1862), one of the bloodiest conflicts in the American Civil War. The partially restored stone fort in Fort Frederick State Park was erected in 1756 during the French and Indian War.

The economy is based on manufacturing and agriculture. Area 458 square miles (1,187 square km). Pop. (2000) 131,923; (2010) 147,430.Watertown,  city, seat (1878) of Codington county, eastern South Dakota, U.S. It lies on the Big Sioux River, between Lakes Kampeska and Pelican, about 95 miles (155 km) north of Sioux Falls. It was laid out in 1878 following the extension of the Winona and St. Peter Railroad (now part of the Union Pacific Railroad Company) and was named for Watertown, New York. An earlier settlement, called Kampeska City, was abandoned in 1874 after grasshoppers destroyed the crops. The economy of Watertown is based largely on the manufacturing of high-technology electronic and magnetic components. Other manufactures include construction equipment and parts, rubber products, signs, welding equipment, and hydraulic and mechanical tubes. Turkey processing is also important. Area agriculture produces dairy products, cattle, poultry, soybeans, corn (maize), wheat, oats, and rye. Tourism, mostly in the form of outdoor recreation on area waterways, contributes to the economy. A casino operated by the Sioux is just north of the city. Watertown is the seat of Lake Area Technical Institute (1965). Local attractions include Mellette House (1883), the home of Arthur Calvin Mellette, the last governor of Dakota Territory and the first governor of South Dakota; the Codington County Heritage Museum, which preserves local history; the Terry Redlin Art Center, which displays original paintings of local artist Terry Redlin and has a planetarium; and the Bramble Park Zoo. Nearby are Sandy Shore and Pelican Lake recreation areas. Inc. 1885. Pop. (2000) 20,237; (2010) 21,482.West Papua,  propinsi (or provinsi; province) of Indonesia, including the Bomberai and Doberai (Vogelkop) peninsulas on the western end of the island of New Guinea and, to the west, the Raja Ampat Islands-most notably Salawati, Waigeo, Batanta, and Misool. The province is bounded to the north by the Pacific Ocean, to the northeast by Cenderawasih Bay, to the southeast by the Indonesian province of Papua, to the south by the Banda Sea, to the west by Berau Bay (between the two peninsulas) and the Ceram Sea, and to the northwest by the Halmahera Sea. The capital is Manokwari, on the northeast coast. Area 37,461 square miles (97,024 square km). Pop. (2010 prelim.) 760,422.

Much of West Papua is under forest cover. Mangrove swamps abound in the lowland coastal areas, although in the deltaic regions sago palms, nipa palms, and pandanus swamps prevail. Trees of the wet, low-lying inland forests include Barringtonia (of the Lecythidaceae, or Brazil nut, family) and Terminalia (a source of fine wood for cabinetry and boatbuilding), as well as various types of ebony (Diospyros). Chinquapin (Castanopsis; related to chestnut) trees are common in the low montane regions, and, as the elevation increases, they give way first to Nothofagus (false beech) forests and then to conifers in the highest areas. Since the late 20th century, deforestation has progressed at a rapid pace, largely because of the expansion of commercial logging and the conversion of woodlands to oil palm plantations.

West Papua lies within the Australian faunal region, which means its animal life is more similar to that of Australia and New Zealand than to that of western Indonesia and the Southeast Asian mainland. Common mammals include marsupials, such as tree kangaroos and forest wallabies; egg-laying echidnas (monotremes); and assorted bats and rats. Cassowaries (a type of flightless bird), birds of paradise, bowerbirds, sandpipers, and swifts are among the notable birdlife. The province is home to a wide variety of frogs, and the coral reefs surrounding the Raja Ampat islands-with their sea horses, shellfish, manta rays, turtles, and numerous species of finfish-are a hot spot of biodiversity.

In the early years of the 21st century, numerous indigenous ethnic groups together constituted a shrinking two-thirds of West Papua’s population, as immigration from other areas, particularly the islands of Java and Celebes (Sulawesi), intensified. The indigenous groups speak an array of Papuan languages, while Austronesian languages are spoken by most of the immigrant communities. More than half the population is Christian (predominantly Protestant), and Muslims are by far the largest minority. Hinduism, Buddhism, and local religions are practiced by just a tiny fraction of West Papua’s residents. More than half the population is concentrated in or near the largest cities, including Manokwari, Sorong, on the northwestern coast, and Fakfak, on the western tip of the Bomberai Peninsula. Otherwise, most residents live in the riverine areas or flatlands of the province’s interior.

Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy, engaging more than half the workforce and accounting for a significant portion of West Papua’s revenue. Rice is the principal staple crop, although cassava, yams, soybeans, and corn (maize) are also important. Nutmeg, oil palm fruit, and cocoa are major cash crops. Pigs, cattle, and goats are among the common livestock. Although services and trade are the next largest employers behind agriculture, manufacturing and mining are greater contributors to the overall economy. Processed foods and beverages, wood products, print media, and transport machinery are among the main manufactures. Petroleum products are the focus of the mining industry, although the region is also rich in copper, gold, nickel, and other minerals.

For administrative purposes, West Papua is divided into a handful of kabupaten (regencies) as well as the kota (city) of Sorong. These units are parceled further into kecamatan (districts), which in turn contain numerous kelurahan, or desa (village clusters), at the lowest administrative level. The chief executive of West Papua is the governor.

The first Europeans to sight the island of New Guinea were the Portuguese in 1511, and what is now the Indonesian portion of the island was subsequently visited by Spanish, Dutch, German, and English explorers. The English attempted to found a colony near Manokwari in 1793. The Dutch claimed the western half of New Guinea in 1828, but their first permanent administrative posts, at Fakfak and Manokwari, were not set up until 1898. Haji Misbach, a Muslim communist, was exiled by the Dutch to western New Guinea in 1924, and three years later about 1,300 communists were imprisoned there after an uprising in Java. The Japanese occupied the northern part of Dutch New Guinea during World War II until Allied forces recaptured the town of Hollandia (now Jayapura, in the province of Papua) in 1944. The Netherlands regained sovereignty of western New Guinea at the end of the war and retained it after officially recognizing Indonesia’s independence in 1949. In 1962, after protracted negotiations, the region was placed under United Nations administration, and in 1963 it was transferred to Indonesia, with the provision that a plebiscite would be held by 1969 to determine its future status.

Opposition to Indonesian rule, led by the Free Papua Movement (Organisasi Papua Merdeka; OPM), erupted almost immediately. The plebiscite took place in 1969, and, although the results were widely viewed as suspect, the area became the Indonesian province of Irian Jaya. The OPM continued to resist Indonesian rule, and violence broke out periodically. In 1999 B.J. Habibie, then president of Indonesia, divided the area into three provinces: Irian Jaya, Central Irian Jaya, and West Irian Jaya. Largely perceived as a "divide-and-rule" maneuver, the partition met with strong local opposition and consequently was annulled the following year by Habibie’s successor, Abdurrahman Wahid. Wahid not only returned the region to the status of a single province but also granted it a significant degree of autonomy.

In January 2002, just a few months after Megawati Sukarnoputri assumed the presidency, Irian Jaya officially changed its name to Papua. Meanwhile, Megawati resurrected the idea of dividing the province, and in 2003, without consulting the residents of Papua or the local government, the province was split into West Irian Jaya (Irian Jaya Barat) and Papua. An interim governor was appointed for West Irian Jaya, and a legislature was installed the following year. Although the constitutionality of the division of the province was disputed for some years, Papua and West Irian Jaya were officially recognized as separate entities by Megawati’s successor, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Both provinces held direct general elections in 2006, and in 2007 West Irian Jaya became known as West Papua.Wexford,  seaport and county seat, County Wexford, Ireland, on the River Slaney. The name Wexford derives from the Norse settlement of Waesfjord. It was an early colony of the English, having been taken by Robert FitzStephen in 1169. The town received a charter in 1317, which was extended in 1411 by Henry IV and in 1558 by Elizabeth I; subsequent charters were granted in 1608 and 1686 by James I and James II, respectively. It was besieged and sacked by the forces of Oliver Cromwell in 1649 and captured and garrisoned for William III in 1690. Wexford lost its charter under the Municipal Corporations (Ireland) Act, 1840, but was granted another in 1846. After the 2006 census, Wexford extended its municipal limits to include built-up areas surrounding it, which greatly increased its population.

Some remains of the old walls and of one of the five towers of the town still exist. The deconsecrated Protestant church, alongside the ruins of the ancient abbey of St. Sepulchre, is said to occupy the spot on which the treaty between the Irish and the English invaders was signed in 1169. Wexford Harbour, formed by the Slaney estuary, is large, though a bar prevents the entrance of vessels drawing more than 12 feet (4 metres); an artificial harbour was opened in 1906 at Rosslare, which is connected with Wexford by rail and is served by passenger vessels from Fishguard, Wales. Wexford’s principal exports are livestock and agricultural produce. The town’s industries are based on agriculture and light engineering. Wexford is a base for salmon- and sea-fishing districts, the centre of a tourist area, and the seat of the Roman Catholic diocese of Ferns. Pop. (2006) 8,854; (2011) 19,913.Xi Xia,  kingdom of the Tibetan-speaking Tangut tribes that was established in 1038 and flourished until 1227. It was located in what are now the northwestern Chinese provinces of Gansu and Shaanxi.

Occupying the area along the trade route between Central Asia and Europe, the Tangut were content with being a tributary state of the Chinese during the Song dynasty period (960–1279) until 1038, when a new leader, Li Yuanhao, assumed the title of emperor as Zhao Yuanhao. Naming his new dynasty for the ancient Chinese state of Xia, Zhao embarked on a campaign to conquer all of China. But in 1044 he abandoned this attempt after the Chinese agreed to pay him an annual tribute.

For the next two centuries the Xi (Western) Xia (as the dynasty became known to distinguish it from its ancient Chinese namesake) maintained an uneasy three-way truce with the Song and with the Liao dynasty (907–1125), established by the Inner Asian Juchen (Chinese: Nüzhen, or Ruzhen) tribes in North China. Modeling their government on that of the Song, the Xi Xia rulers adopted a new writing system for their people. Unlike the Chinese, they were ardent devotees of Buddhism and departed from the Chinese model in making Buddhism the state religion.

The Xi Xia dynasty was finally conquered by the Mongol troops of Genghis Khan in 1227.In addition, the range’s scenic Yolyn Am (Lammergeier Valley)-now a national park, with a deep gorge containing a small perennial glacier-is surrounded by towering rocky cliffs where lammergeiers (bearded vultures) roost.
…William Tuke, who established the York Retreat for the humane care of the mentally ill in 1796, and the physician Vincenzo Chiarugi, who published a humanitarian regime for his hospital in Florence in 1788. In the mid-19th century Dorothea Dix led a campaign to increase public awareness of the inhumane…Yueyang,  city, northern Hunan sheng (province), southeast-central China. It is situated on the east bank of the outlet from the Dongting Lake into the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang), some 5 miles (8 km) from the outlet’s confluence with the Yangtze. Its port on the Yangtze is known as Chenglingji. The city is built on a high bluff well above high-water level, in a good defensive position.

Known as Ximi under the Chu state during the Spring and Autumn (Chunqiu) and the Warring States (Zhanguo) periods (770–476 bce and 475–221 bce, respectively), it was a fortified military stronghold called Baqiu during the Three Kingdoms (Sanguo) period (220–280 ce); a county named Baling was set up there in 280. In 439 it was made a commandery, and in 528 it became a prefecture named Yueyang, whence its present name. After the reunification of China by the Sui dynasty (581–618), it became the prefecture of Yuezhou in 591, retaining that name until 1913. Under the Song dynasty (960–1279) it was heavily fortified, with walls some 4 miles (6.4 km) in circumference. In 1368 the Ming dynasty promoted it to the status of superior prefecture. During the Taiping Rebellion (1850–64), its capture by the rebels in 1852 was an important stage in their advance up the Yangtze River valley to Nanjing, while its recapture in 1854 secured the control of the central government over the middle Yangtze basin. After the foundation of the Chinese republic in 1911, it became a county in 1913, taking the name Yueyang in place of its former county name, Baling, even though it continued to be referred to as Yuezhou. Yueyang briefly held municipal status (1960–62), and it became a county-level city in 1975. It was merged with Yueyang prefecture in 1986 to become a prefecture-level city.

The city was opened to foreign trade in 1898 (as compensation by the Qing dynasty [1644–1911/12] for the rejection of a British loan), and a foreign settlement and commercial establishments were set up at the river port of Chenglingji. The railway from the Hankou in Hubei province (now a district of Wuhan) to Guangzhou (Canton; Guangdong province) passes through Yueyang, connecting it also to Changsha, the provincial capital. Although planned as early as 1898, the section from Hankou to Changsha was completed only in 1917, and the final connection to Guangdong only in 1936. That railway is now part of the main north-south trunk line extending from Beijing to Guangzhou.

In addition to its rail connections, Yueyang is a collecting and transshipment point for water traffic using Dongting Lake, the Xiang River (which flows north into the lake) and its tributaries, and other waterways and lakes in northern Hunan and nearby parts of Hubei and Jiangxi provinces. It exports cotton, grain, beans, and ramie fibre, but its most important trade is in timber. Vast rafts of timber are floated down the waterways to Yueyang, and from there it is either shipped on down the Yangtze or transported elsewhere by rail. A major expressway from Beijing to Zhuzhou (southeast of Changsha) passes through the area via a bridge over a portion of Dongting Lake. Petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, building materials, paper, and textiles are now the main industrial products of the city. Other industries include food processing and the production of feed grains.

 A city with a history dating back some 2,500 years, Yueyang attracts large crowds of tourists to its historic locations and scenic sites each year. One of the best-known attractions is the famous Yueyang Tower (or Yueyang Pavilion), located on the shore of Dongting Lake south of the Yangtze. Pop. (2002 est.) city, 522,769; (2007 est.) urban agglom., 826,000.…known are the bearded, or German, group-the common garden irises, many of which are hybrids. The water-loving Japanese iris (Iris ensata), frequently featured in Japanese watercolours. The yellow, or water, flag (I. pseudacorus) is a swamp plant native to Eurasia and North Africa; the blue flag (I. versicolor) occupies similar…
The blue vervain (V. hastata) reaches a height of 1.5 metres (5 feet) and produces spikes of blue to purple flowers. The Eurasian species V. officinalis, the herb of the cross, was once considered a medicinal plant.…of various trees of the Bombax genus of the Malvaceae family; the plants grow in tropical countries and are cultivated in the West Indies and Brazil. The seed floss’s individual fibres, soft and ranging from pale yellow to brown in colour, are about 0.5 to 3.25 cm (0.25 to 1.25…buffalo grass,  (Bouteloua dactyloides),  perennial western North American grass of the family Poaceae. Buffalo grass is native to short-grass and mixed-grass prairies and is an important year-round forage grass. The plant forms a dense turf and thick sod, which early settlers used in the construction of dwellings. It is sometimes planted as an ornamental or lawn grass, though its long winter dormancy makes it unattractive to some growers.

Buffalo grass is less than 20 cm (8 inches) tall, with gray-green curly leaves. It spreads extensively creeping stolons (horizontal, root-forming stems) and is drought-tolerant. The male and female flowers are borne separately, and the seeds are produced in burlike fruits.bush honeysuckle,  (genus Diervilla),  genus of three species of low shrubs belonging to the family Caprifoliaceae (formerly Diervillaceae), native to eastern North America. They are frequently confused with the closely related Tatarian honeysuckle (Lonicera tatarica) and other cultivated members of the genus Lonicera, which are invasive species in many parts of the United States (see honeysuckle). Diervilla species are attractive to butterflies and hummingbirds and are commonly used in native landscaping.

Bush honeysuckles are deciduous perennials and have oval leaves and clusters of tubular flowers at the branch tips. They spread by rhizomes (underground stems) and form patches in rocky dry areas. Flowering occurs in early summer. The yellow or reddish yellow blooms are followed by slender beaked fruits. The northern bush honeysuckle (D. lonicera) and the mountain bush honeysuckle (D. rivularis) are similar except for the smaller size and more-pointed leaves of D. lonicera. The southern bush honeysuckle (D. sessilifolia) has stalkless leaves and angled branches.The chinaberry (Melia azedarach), also called bead tree and Persian lilac, is an ornamental Asian tree with round yellow fruits, often cultivated in many tropical and warm temperate areas.clover,  (genus Trifolium),  genus of about 300 annual and perennial species in the pea family (Fabaceae). Clovers occur in most temperate and subtropical regions of the world, except Southeast Asia and Australia; cultivated species have become naturalized in temperate regions worldwide. The plants are useful as livestock feed and can be planted as a cover crop or used as a green manure. The flowers are highly attractive to bees, and clover honey is a common secondary product of clover cultivation.

Clovers are generally short-lived herbs and feature alternate compound leaves, usually with three toothed leaflets. The very small, fragrant flowers are crowded into dense, nearly spherical heads, or spikes and can be white, pink, red, or yellow. The small, dry fruits usually contain one or two seeds. Many species tolerate shade, repeated mowing, and foot traffic very well and are often found in lawns. The plants are susceptible to alfalfa weevils and a number of foliar diseases, including common leaf rot and mosaic.

Clover is highly palatable to livestock and is high in protein, phosphorus, and calcium, thus providing valuable nourishment in either the green or the dry stage. In addition to their principal value as animal feed in the form of hay, pasture, and silage, the clovers are valuable soil-improving and soil-conserving plants. Clover adds about 55–170 kg per hectare (about 50–150 pounds per acre) of nitrogen to the soil and increases availability of other nutrients for following crops.

The most important agricultural species are red clover (Trifolium pratense), white clover (T. repens), and alsike clover (T. hybridum). Red clover, a biennial, or short-lived perennial, bears an oval purplish flower head about 2.5 cm (1 inch) in diameter. White clover, a low creeping perennial, is often used in lawn-grass mixtures and bears a white flower head often tinged with pink. Alsike clover, a perennial species sometimes called Swedish clover, or Alsatian clover, bears globular rosy-pink flower heads.labrusca), from which Concord grapes and other "slipskin" grapes are derived, are grown as table grapes or are used for grape jelly, grape flavouring, grape juice, and kosher wines. Summer grape (V. aestivalis) is thought to be the oldest American grape cultivar. The fruit is well suited for…coccinea), and copper roses (E. multicaulis), are common in Mexican and southwestern American gardens.Other trees, such as the coumarou, or tonka bean (Dipteryx odorata), yield perfumes, flavourings, and pharmaceutical ingredients. However, the rubber and Brazil nut trees produce more-valuable commodities. The rubber tree, for example, has been one of the reasons for the intense penetration and exploitation of the forest. It gave rise…dika,  (Irvingia gabonensis),  tree of the family Irvingiaceae, native to western Africa, and its edible seeds. The seeds, commonly called dika nuts, are used principally for food and oil and in weight loss supplements. The fleshy fruit somewhat resembles the unrelated mango and is eaten fresh or processed into jellies and jams. The tree produces a hard wood that is useful for heavy construction.

The dika is a large tree with a dense evergreen crown and large buttresses. The simple leaves are asymmetrical and glossy on the upper surface. The bisexual flowers are yellow to pale greenish and are borne in small clusters. The fruit is a large edible drupe with thick fibrous flesh.

The seed kernels are commonly roasted like coffee beans, then pounded and poured into a mold before being added to boiling meat and vegetables. The seeds are also used to adulterate chocolate and ground to make flour. The fat is extracted from the seeds for soap and candlemaking. A relish made from the dika nut is customarily eaten with plantains.Eugenia,  large genus of chiefly tropical shrubs and trees of the myrtle family (Myrtaceae). The edible fruits of many species are commonly made into jam or jelly, and many species of Eugenia yield high-grade lumber. A number are widely used in the tropics and subtropics as ornamentals.

Members of the genus Eugenia are mostly evergreen plants. The aromatic, glossy leaves are borne oppositely along the stems and are usually simple with entire margins. The flowers are solitary or in small clusters and produce berry fruits.

One of the most well-known species is the Surinam, or Brazilian, cherry (Eugenia uniflora), native to eastern South America. The plant is often grown as a privacy hedge and for its edible fruits, which range in flavour from tart to sweet. The rainforest plum (E. candolleana) and uvaia, or uvalha (E. pyriformis), both of Brazil, are also sometimes cultivated for use in landscaping and for their edible fruits. Cedar Bay cherry (E. reinwardtiana), of Queensland, Australia, is similarly cultivated and has sweet fruits that are eaten fresh or used in drinks or candies.

Some Asian species, formerly considered part of the genus, are now listed under Syzygium, including, notably, the clove tree (Syzygium aromaticum, formerly E. caryophyllata). The tree occurs in the West Indies and Indonesia and produces flowers that are removed as buds, dried, and sometimes processed to yield clove oil. The whole clove and its extract are used in flavouring; the oil is also used medicinally (see clove). The bark of S. cymosa (formerly E. cymosa) of Indonesia is the source of a black dye.The fiddle-leaf fig (F. lyrata), the weeping fig (F. benjamina), and some climbing species such as the climbing fig (F. pumila) are also popular ornamentals.diandrus), and foxtail brome (B. rubens) are dangerous to grazing animals; spines on their spikelets or bracts can puncture the animals’ eyes, mouths, and intestines, leading to infection and possible death.The other group is Hydrophylloideae (formerly Hydrophyllaceae, or the waterleaf family), which includes Phacelia (150 species), Hydrophyllum, and Wigandia. They differ from other borages primarily in their parietal placentation and more numerous seeds.Impatiens,  large genus of herbaceous plants belonging to the family Balsaminaceae. Impatiens are widely distributed in Asia, Africa, and North America, and several are popular garden plants.

Impatiens bear simple leaves that are usually alternately arranged along the stem. The upper leaves are often borne in a whorl (i.e., three or more arising in a circle from the stem). The flowers, which may be purple, yellow, pink, red, or white, are irregular in shape and arise from the leaf axils; they may be solitary or in small clusters. The name, meaning "impatient," refers to the readiness with which the plants’ seeds are dispersed. The ripe seedpod bursts upon slight pressure, thus scattering the seeds.

The garden balsam (Impatiens balsamina) is native to the tropics of Asia but has long been cultivated in temperate regions of the world. The plant is an annual that grows about 75 cm (30 inches) in height and has many horticultural forms with flowers of almost every colour except blue. Spotted jewelweed (I. capensis) and pale touch-me-not (or pale snapweed, I. pallida) are common weeds native to extensive regions of eastern North America. Spotted jewelweed grows up to 150 cm (59 inches) tall and bears orange flowers spotted with red or brown, while pale touch-me-not has larger, yellower flowers. The western touch-me-not (I. noli-tangere) is native to western North America, Europe, and Asia.tenuiflorum) and lemon basil (O. ×citriodorum) are common in Asian cuisine. The dried large-leaf varieties have a fragrant aroma faintly reminiscent of anise and a warm, sweet, aromatic, mildly pungent flavour. The dried leaves of the common basil are less fragrant and more pungent in flavour.Southern lobelia (L. georgiana), from North America, as well as great blue lobelia (L. siphilitica) and its hybrids, also have blue flowers. Various lobelia hybrids constitute a fine group of fairly hardy and showy garden plants.
The London plane (P. acerifolia), a hybrid between the American and the Oriental planes, combines characteristics of both in varying degrees. It is a little shorter and more squat than the American tree and usually has bristly, paired seedballs. There are variegated forms of London plane.…
The naked man orchid (O. italica), sometimes called Italian orchid, is native to the Mediterranean region. The pink, purple, or white flowers are densely clustered on a single thick stalk and resemble a hatted naked man. The petals and sepals that constitute the "hat" are often…poison sumac,  (Toxicodendron vernix),  poisonous shrub or small tree of the cashew family (Anacardiaceae), native to swampy acidic soils of eastern North America. The clear sap, which blackens on exposure to air, contains urushiol and is extremely irritating to the skin for many people. The plant is considered more allergenic than the closely related poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans) or western poison oak (T. diversilobum). The itchy and painful inflammation, known as contact dermatitis, can persist for days or weeks.

Poison sumac is a deciduous tree or shrub with an open form. It typically reaches about 6 metres (20 feet) in height. The compound leaves consist of 7–13 oval leaflets with smooth margins. Young leaves are often bright orange. The leaves mature to a deep glossy green and turn red-orange before they drop in autumn. The small yellow-green flowers are borne in loose hanging clusters that emerge from the leaf axils. Unlike the upright fuzzy reddish fruit clusters of true sumacs (genus Rhus), poison sumac has whitish waxy drupes that droop loosely from its stalks.…of species of the genera Quassia and Picrasma yields quassia, a bitter substance used in medicines. The crucifixion thorn (Castela emoryi) is native to the deserts of the southwestern United States.…rain capes, baskets, raffia (Raphia farinifera), hats, hammocks, and the fibre known as piassava.media), and little quaking grass, or shivery grass (B. minor).sneezeweed,   any of about 40 species of tall herbs constituting the genus Helenium of the family Asteraceae, native to North America. Most are perennials with flat-topped clusters of yellow, brown, or red flower heads and leaves that alternate along the stem. Summer- or fall-blooming species are cultivated as border plants. The disk flowers are darker than the ray flowers, which may be turned back.sorghum,  (Sorghum bicolor),  cereal grain plant of the grass family (Poaceae) and its edible starchy seeds. The plant likely originated in Africa, where it is a major food crop, and has numerous varieties, including grain sorghums, used for food; grass sorghums, grown for hay and fodder; and broomcorn, used in making brooms and brushes. In India sorghum is known as jowar, cholam, or jonna, in West Africa as Guinea corn, and in China as kaoliang. Sorghum is especially valued in hot and arid regions for its resistance to drought and heat.

Sorghum is a strong grass and usually grows to a height of 0.6 to 2.4 metres (2 to 8 feet), sometimes reaching as high as 4.6 metres (15 feet). Stalks and leaves are coated with a white wax, and the pith, or central portion, of the stalks of certain varieties is juicy and sweet. The leaves are about 5 cm (2 inches) broad and 76 cm (2.5 feet) long. The tiny flowers are produced in panicles that range from loose to dense; each flower cluster bears 800–3,000 kernels. The seeds vary widely among different types in colour, shape, and size, but they are smaller than those of wheat.

Sorghum is of a lower feed quality than corn (maize). It is high in carbohydrates, with 10 percent protein and 3.4 percent fat, and contains calcium and small amounts of iron, vitamin B1, and niacin. For human consumption, the gluten-free grain is usually ground into a meal that is made into porridge, flatbreads, and cakes. The characteristic strong flavour can be reduced by processing. The grain is also used in making edible oil, starch, dextrose (a sugar), paste, and alcoholic beverages. The stalks are used as fodder and building materials. Sweet sorghums, or sorgos, are grown mainly in the United States and southern Africa for forage and for syrup manufacture and are sometimes used in the production of ethyl alcohol for biofuel.stinging nettle,  (Urtica dioica),  weedy perennial plant of the nettle family (Urticaceae), known for its stinging leaves. Stinging nettle is  distributed nearly worldwide but is especially common in Europe, North America, North Africa, and parts of Asia. The plant is common in herbal medicine, and young leaves can be cooked and eaten as a nutritious potherb. Additionally, stinging nettle has been used as a source of bast fibres for textiles and is sometimes used in cosmetics.

Stinging nettle is an herbaceous plant and often grows to about 2 metres (6.5 feet) in height. The plant can spread vegetatively with its yellow creeping rhizomes and often forms dense colonies. The toothed leaves are borne oppositely along the stem, and both the stems and leaves are covered with numerous stinging and non-stinging trichomes (plant hairs). The plants can be dioecious (an individual produces only female or male flowers) or monoecious (an individual bears both male and female flowers), depending on the subspecies. The tiny green or white flowers are borne in dense whorled clusters in the leaf axils and stem tips and are wind-pollinated. The fruits are small achenes, and the plants produce copious amounts of seeds.

The stinging trichomes of the leaves and stems have bulbous tips that break off when brushed against, revealing needlelike tubes that pierce the skin. They inject a mix of acetylcholine, formic acid, histamine, and serotonin, causing an itchy, burning rash in humans and other animals that may last up to 12 hours. Hunting dogs running through stinging nettle thickets have been poisoned, sometimes lethally, by the massive accumulation of stings. This defense mechanism is an effective deterrent against most large herbivores, though the plant is important food for several butterfly species and aphids. The dried plant can be used as livestock feed, and heating or cooking the fresh leaves renders them safe for consumption.

Stinging nettle has a long history of use as a medicinal herb and is still used in folk medicine for a wide array of disorders, though there is limited clinical evidence supporting its efficacy. The rootstock is used as a diuretic and as an herbal treatment for benign prostatic hyperplasia (prostate enlargement) and other urinary disorders. Tea made from the leaves has been used to treat hay fever, diabetes, gout, and arthritis, and fresh stinging leaves are sometimes applied to arthritic joints in a process known as urtification, which is said to stimulate blood flow. Topical creams have also been developed for joint pain and various skin ailments, including eczema and dandruff.sun orchid,  (genus Thelymitra),  genus of about 100 species of orchids (family Orchidaceae) distributed throughout Australasia. A sun orchid derives its name from its habit of remaining closed except in strong sunlight. Some self-pollinating species never open their flowers.

Sun orchids are terrestrial perennial plants. They have a pair of ovoid tubers and typically bear a single leaf. Unlike most other orchid species, sun orchid flowers lack a central labellum (modified petal), meaning that all three petals and the sepals are similar in appearance. The flowers also have a hooded column (reproductive structure) with unusual tufted, comblike, or earlike appendages.

The lemon orchid (Thelymitra antennifera), the twisted sun orchid (T. flexuosa), the custard orchid (T. violosa), and the scented sun orchid (T. avistata) are common Australian species.…meadow fescue and tall or reed fescue (S. arundinaceus, formerly F. arundinacea) are Old World species that have become widespread in parts of North America.
titan arum,  (Amorphophallus titanum),  herbaceous flowering plant of the arum family (Araceae), known for its massive foul-smelling inflorescence (cluster of flowers). The plant is endemic to the steep hillsides of rainforests in western Sumatra but is cultivated in botanic gardens worldwide. The unusual short-lived flower structure is the largest unbranched inflorescence of any plant and smells of rotting flesh. Usually taking 4–10 years or more between flowerings, a titan arum is often a major tourist attraction when in bloom.

Like other members of the arum family, the massive inflorescence of the titan arum consists of an inner flower spike, known as a spadix, surrounded by a petal-like collar known as a spathe. The large furrowed spathe is green to cream-coloured on the outside and tightly encloses the spadix before opening to reveal its deep crimson to purple interior. The upper, visible half of the spadix is smooth and yellowish to brown in colour, and the entire spadix can reach more than 3 metres (9.8 feet) in height. Although the inflorescence develops over several months, with its growth peaking at a rate of up to 15 cm (6 inches) a day, it only blooms for around 24–48 hours. Hundreds of unisexual flowers are borne toward the bottom of the spadix within a protective chamber formed by the spathe and mature separately to reduce self-pollination; the dense cream-coloured male flowers are located above the pink to orange female flowers. While in bloom, the structure generates heat, more than 90 °F (32 °C), and produces its characteristic carrion odour to attract flesh flies and carrion beetles for pollination. The fertilized flowers develop into bright red to orange spherical fruits, and the spathe and the upper spadix collapse away to facilitate their dispersal, commonly by rhinoceros hornbills (Buceros rhinoceros) and other animals. Eventually the remaining structure withers and the plant goes dormant.

During the years that the plant does not flower, it usually produces a single, treelike leaf, some 4.6–7 metres (15–23 feet) tall. The petiole (leaf stalk) is speckled with white patches and typically features three branches topped with numerous large leaflets. Most of the food it produces is stored in a massive underground corm and is later used to fuel the rapid growth of the inflorescence or a new leaf following a period of dormancy. The corm can weigh around 70–90 kg (154–200 pounds) and is the largest in the plant kingdom. After 12–18 months of photosynthesis, the leaf dies back, and the plant goes dormant. Typically several leaf cycles are completed before the plant has enough stored energy to flower again.

The largest single flower belongs to another carrion flower of Indonesia, the unrelated monster flower (Rafflesia arnoldii). The largest branched inflorescence is that of the talipot palm (Corypha umbraculifera), native to India and Sri Lanka.baccata), Toringo crabapple (M. sieboldii), and Japanese flowering crabapple (M. floribunda). Among notable American species are the garland, or sweet crab (M. coronaria), Oregon crabapple (M. fusca), prairie crabapple (M. ioensis), and southern crabapple (M. angustifolia).…is the fossil yielded by Trachylobium verrucosum; it is found embedded in the earth over a wide belt of East Africa on the western coast of Zanzibar on tracts where not a tree is now visible. South American copals are available from the Hymenaea courbaril and other species of trees……bullhorn acacia (or bullhorn wattle; Vachellia cornigera). The ants obtain food and shelter, and the acacia depends on the ants for protection from browsing animals, which the ants drive away. Neither member can survive successfully without the other, also exemplifying obligative mutualism.…on their lower surfaces; the white, or Sierra, alder (A. rhombifolia), an early-flowering tree with orange-red twigs and buds; the gray, or speckled, alder (A. incana), a small shrubby tree, often with conspicuous whitish, wartlike, porous markings, or lenticels; and the aromatic-leaved American green alder (A. viridis). A number of…
acervulus,  an open, saucer-shaped asexual fruiting body found in fungi (kingdom Fungi). Always developed below the epidermis of the host tissue, it bears conidiophores (specialized filaments, or hyphae) that form conidia (spores).African swine fever (ASF),  highly contagious and usually fatal viral disease of swine that is characterized by high fever, lesions, leukopenia (abnormally low count of white blood cells), elevated pulse and respiration rate, and death within four to seven days after the onset of fever.

The virus responsible for African swine fever is classified as an asfarvirus (family Asfarviridae, genus Asfivirus). It is physically, chemically, and antigenically distinct from the togavirus that causes hog cholera (swine fever). African swine fever virus can survive heat, putrefaction, smoking, partial cooking, and dryness and lives up to six months in chilled carcasses. The incubation period is from 5 to 15 days.

The disease was first identified in 1910 in Kenya, where it was noted in domestic swine after contact with forest pigs and warthogs. It was confined to certain parts of Africa until 1957, when the disease spread-perhaps by means of processed pork products-to Portugal and then to Spain, Italy, Brazil, and other countries. During the 1970s, African swine fever spread to South America and certain Caribbean islands, but rigorous eradication programs have controlled the disease in the Caribbean area.

African swine fever is difficult to distinguish from acute classical hog cholera. Both diseases produce high fevers that last for about four or five days. Once the fever has subsided, however, African swine fever virus characteristically causes death within two days (as opposed to seven days for hog cholera). Although immunization has been effective in the prevention of hog cholera, no immunization measures have been shown to be effective in the prevention of African swine fever, nor is there any effective treatment of the disease. The prohibition of pigs and pig products from countries in which the disease exists has prevented its further spread.…of anamorphosis is the so-called Ames Room, in which people and objects are distorted by manipulation of the contours of the room in which they are seen. This and other aspects of anamorphosis received a good deal of attention in the 20th century from psychologists interested in perception.The bottommost, or aphotic, zone is the region of perpetual darkness that lies beneath the photic zone and includes most of the ocean waters.archegonium,   the female reproductive organ in ferns and mosses. An archegonium also occurs in some gymnosperms, e.g., cycads and conifers. A flask-shaped structure, it consists of a neck, with one or more layers of cells, and a swollen base-the venter-which contains the egg. Neck-canal cells, located above the egg, disappear as the archegonium matures, thus producing a passage for entry of the sperm. The sperm are produced in the corresponding male reproductive organ, the antheridium.arroyo,  a dry channel lying in a semiarid or desert area and subject to flash flooding during seasonal or irregular rainstorms. Such transitory streams, rivers, or creeks are noted for their gullying effects and especially for their rapid rates of erosion, transportation, and deposition. There have been reports of up to 8 feet (2 m) of deposition in 60 years and like amounts of erosion during a single flood event.

The beds of ephemeral streams are commonly almost flat in cross section and are dry most of the time. Such beds are given various names according to regional differences, such as wadi or oued in North Africa and Saudi Arabia and dry wash or arroyo in the southwestern United States. Most ephemeral streams become shallower downstream, and most of the water is absorbed by the dry stream bed. Mudflows are a fairly common occurrence because sediment yields are high in arid and semiarid areas, and the soil lacks the binding effect of continuous vegetation cover.badland,   area cut and eroded by many deep, tortuous gullies with intervening saw-toothed divides. The gullies extend from main rivers back to tablelands about 150 m (500 feet) and higher. The gully bottoms increase in gradient from almost flat near the main rivers to nearly vertical at the edges of the tablelands. Because the rocks are not uniform in character, differences in erosion result in stair-step profiles. The joining and separating of the gullies cause many isolated irregular spires, small flat-topped buttes, or mesas, and produce a landscape of jagged, fluted, and seemingly inaccessible hills.

Badlands develop in arid to semiarid areas where the bedrock is poorly cemented and rainfall generally occurs as cloudbursts. The dry, granular surface material and light vegetation is swept from the slopes during showers, leaving the gullies bare.

The term badland was first applied to a part of southwestern South Dakota, which French-Canadian trappers called the mauvaises terres pour traverser (the "bad lands to cross"); later it was applied to other areas with similarly eroded topography. The South Dakota Badlands comprise an area of approximately 2,000 square miles (5,200 square km) that stretches east and west for 100 miles (160 km) along the Jackson-Washabaugh and Pennington-Shannon county lines. The Badlands National Monument embraces the greater part of the rugged terrain in Jackson and Pennington counties.band gap,  in solid-state physics, a range of energy levels within a given crystal that are impossible for an electron to possess. Generally, a material will have several band gaps throughout its band structure (the continuum of allowed and forbidden electron energy levels), with large band gaps between core bands and progressively narrower band gaps between higher bands until no more occur. The phenomenon of the band gap occurs when two adjacent allowed bands are not wide enough to span the full range of electron energy levels.

In practice, most research is focused on only one particular band gap-that which encloses the Fermi level (the energy level at which electrons exist or are below when a solid is at absolute zero temperature). This particular band gap is present in semiconductors and insulators and thus is the only band gap relevant to the discussion of electronics and optoelectronics (the study of electronic devices that interact with light). It is not present in metals, where the Fermi level is instead enclosed by an allowed band. Hence, metals are said to have no band gap, despite technically having band gaps farther away from the Fermi level. In some contexts, the term band gap refers to the width of a material’s band gap, customarily reported in electron volts (eV).

Based on the absence or presence of a band gap and on band gap size, materials can be classified into metals, semiconductors, and insulators. Foremost, metals can be distinguished from semiconductors and insulators by their lack of a band gap. Semiconductors and insulators may be differentiated by the size of their band gaps, the former having narrower band gaps and the latter having wider band gaps. In some texts, 9 eV is designated as the cutoff band gap for being considered a semiconductor, though this is by no means universal.

That metals are excellent conductors of electricity, insulators are poor conductors of electricity, and semiconductors are somewhere in-between is common knowledge. Lesser known, however, is that those properties are determined by the band gap in each of the different materials. In particular, metals have high electrical conductivity due to their lack of a band gap-with no band gap separating the valence band (normally occupied states) from the conduction band (normally unoccupied states; electrons in this band move freely through the material and are responsible for electrical conduction), a small fraction of electrons will always be in the conduction band (i.e., free). This results in a superior electrical conductivity in metals.

Insulators, on the other hand, owe their low electrical conductivity to wide band gaps separating the valence band from the conduction band. If their band gaps were narrower, it would be feasible for thermal excitations to raise electrons to the conduction band; however, they are simply too wide for this to occur appreciably. As a result, the conductivity of a good insulator can be as little as 24 orders of magnitude less than that of a good conductor.

Finally, semiconductors rank intermediate in electrical conductivity, because their narrow band gaps make it nontrivial, but not impossible, for electrons to be raised to the conduction band by way of thermal excitation. The result is conductivity in semiconductors that is about 4–16 orders of magnitude less than that of a good conductor.

The width of the band gaps in typical elemental and binary semiconductors are generally not optimized for specialized applications in electronics and optoelectronics. Thus it is often lucrative to tune, or engineer, the band gap of semiconductors. To that end, scientists have used techniques such as employing semiconductor heterojunctions and molecular beam epitaxy and, in doing so, unlocked the band gaps necessary to create heterojunction bipolar transistors, laser diodes, and solar cells.…forests in western Europe (the BAT, or "Boreal–Atlantic Transition"). In The Netherlands the barrier beaches re-formed close to the present coastline, and widespread tidal flats developed to the interior. These are known as the Calais Beds (or Calaisian) from the definition in Flanders by Dubois. In the protected inner margins,……what Gould referred to as Baupläne (German: "body plans").…only under a microscope), or biochemical (evident only by chemical analysis). A typical gross anatomic lesion might be the solid tumour of a carcinoma of the colon, while the corresponding histological lesion would be the atypical cells (dysplasia) that precede or surround the gross tumour; and a biochemical lesion associated…biozone,   stratigraphic unit consisting of all the strata containing a particular fossil and, hence, deposited during its existence. The extent of the unit in a particular place, on the local stratigraphic range of the fossil plant or animal involved, is called a teilzone. The geological time units corresponding to biozones and teilzones are biochrons and teilchrons, respectively. Biozone is also used synonymously with the terms zone and range zone in stratigraphy. bomb cyclone,  large midlatitude storm resulting from explosive cyclogenesis (or, informally, bombogenesis), a type of accelerated extratropical cyclone development in which surface pressure falls substantially over a 24-hour period. The precipitation associated with a bomb cyclone (or weather bomb) is intense, ranging from heavy downpours to strong thunderstorms to blizzards and heavy snowfalls, along with strong winds. Although bomb cyclones can form throughout the year in both the Northern and Southern hemispheres, they receive the most attention from meteorologists and media outlets during the winter because of their association with strong winter storms. The first recorded use of bomb as a name for such cyclones is by American meteorologists Frederick Sanders and John R. Gyakum in 1980.

In structure, a bomb cyclone is indistinguishable from any other intense midlatitude storm. The center of the storm is a low-pressure cell (or cyclone) that draws winds near the surface inward. However, a bomb cyclone is set apart by its rapid rate of intensification, which corresponds to a decrease in atmospheric pressure of 24 millibars (2,400 pascals, or 18 mm of mercury) or more per day at 60° latitude and a decrease of about 17.8 millibars (1,780 pascals, or about 13.4 mm of mercury) or more per day at 40° latitude (see also mercury barometer).

Bomb cyclones can form either poleward of the westerly winds or within them, where colder, drier air from a high-pressure system (or anticyclone) meets typically warmer, moisture-laden air of a low-pressure system. When drier air in the stratosphere passes over an area of low pressure, air in the depression rises quickly and rotates, which in turn strengthens the low by causing atmospheric pressure at its center to fall rapidly. Bomb cyclones are most common where there are sharp temperature gradients between the different air masses-for instance, when cold continental air meets a warmer air mass, such as one whose warmth is fueled by a warm ocean current. Consequently, bomb cyclones tend to develop along the western sides of oceans, where warm currents are largely located, such as in the northwestern Atlantic Ocean near the east coast of North America (a region strongly affected by the Gulf Stream) and in the northwestern Pacific Ocean near the east coast of Asia (a region strongly affected by the Kuroshio, or Japan Current).bone mineral density,  estimate of bone mass. Bone is a rich mineral reservoir, composed mainly of calcium and phosphorous, which together impart hardness, rigidity, and compressive strength to bone. Bone is also dynamic in that it is constantly being broken down and rebuilt. A normal individual has a healthy equilibrium between these two opposing processes. However, when the mineral content of bone is taken away faster than it is added, the bone becomes thin, weak, and prone to fracture.

Bone mineral density tests specifically measure the mineral content in one square centimetre of bone and estimate the risk for fracture. An example of a bone mineral density test is the dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan, which employs minimal amounts of radiation and is commonly used for osteoporosis (bone-thinning) screening. Other types of clinical tests that are used to determine bone mineral density include those based on the use of single-photon absorptiometry, dual-photon absorptiometry, ultrasound, and quantitative computed tomography.

In order to determine whether a person is affected by a reduction in bone density, bone mineral density testing typically is performed on the individual’s wrists, spine, and hips. In the case of a DXA scan, the results are expressed in two numbers, the Z-score and the T-score. The Z-score is derived by comparing a person’s DXA scan result to a healthy person of similar age and represents the number of standard deviations that the patient may diverge from the normal bone mineral density score for his or her age. The Z-score can sometimes shed light on the underlying cause of bone loss. The T-score is derived by comparing a person’s DXA scan result to that of a healthy young adult of the same sex and race or to that of a healthy young adult woman. A T-score between −1.0 and −2.5 indicates osteopenia (a reduced amount of bone tissue), while a T-score of −2.5 indicates osteoporosis.

An integral part of preventing bone fractures associated with osteoporosis is early patient screening and intervention. General guidelines recommend obtaining a bone mineral density test in all women aged 65 and older, regardless of the presence of any other risk factors for osteoporosis. Younger postmenopausal women who have one or more risk factors for osteoporosis (e.g., family history, early estrogen deficiency, endocrine abnormalities) and postmenopausal women who experience fractures may also undergo DXA scan screening.

Bone mineral density testing has been shown to significantly reduce fracture risk. For example, by identifying individuals at greatest risk for osteoporosis and employing early intervention, such as lifestyle modification and medications, the risk of hip and vertebral fractures can be reduced by as much as 50 percent.…spermatozoa undergo physiological change, called capacitation, which is a prerequisite for their participation in fertilization; they are able to undergo the acrosome reaction, traverse the egg envelopes, and reach the interior of the egg. Dispersal of cells in the outer egg envelope (corona radiata) is caused by the action of… A wide variety of carbon nucleophiles add to aldehydes, and such reactions are of prime importance in synthetic organic chemistry because the product is a combination of two carbon skeletons. Organic chemists have been able to assemble almost any carbon skeleton, no matter… …in what is called the cell-mediated immune response. T lymphocytes also participate in the rejection of transplanted tissues and in certain types of allergic reactions.…heartbeat, or heart rate (chronotropic effects); or they can affect the regularity of the heartbeat (rhythmic effects).
conjunctivitis,  inflammation of the conjunctiva, the delicate mucous membrane that lines the inner surface of the eyelids and covers the front part of the white of the eye. The inflammation may be caused by a viral or bacterial infection. It can also be caused by a chemical burn or mechanical injury, or it may be part of an allergic reaction. Often both the conjunctiva and the cornea are involved, a condition called keratoconjunctivitis. The symptoms of conjunctivitis vary, but they include light sensitivity, redness, itching, a sensation of sand in the eye, and eye discharge (which can be either watery or thick and coloured).

A variety of viral organisms can give rise to conjunctivitis. Adenoviruses, a group of viruses whose disease-causing members may cause respiratory infections or may survive for long periods in lymphoid tissue (e.g., in the tonsils), may attack the conjunctiva and cornea, causing epidemic keratoconjunctivitis. This condition is highly contagious and is rapidly spread through direct and indirect contact with infected individuals. Typically, a person is contagious for at least a week following onset of symptoms. Treatment is mainly supportive, with emphasis on strict hygiene to minimize spread of the virus. The majority of cases resolve without residual problems. Other viruses, such as those that cause cold sores, chickenpox, and measles, also may invade the conjunctiva. Treatment for these cases may include antiviral drops.

Bacterial invasion of the conjunctiva is less common than viral infection. Infection is through direct contact with an infected person or through a person’s own nasal or sinus mucosa. Eye discharge is generally thick and coloured, as opposed to the watery discharge of viral conjunctivitis. The organisms most commonly responsible for bacterial conjunctivitis in humans are Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Haemophilus influenzae (which may invade the respiratory tract or the brain coverings). Gonococcal conjunctivitis, invasion of the conjunctiva by gonorrhea organisms, was once common among newborn infants, who became infected during delivery. This infection can cause blindness if not treated promptly. It is prevented by routine application of antimicrobials to each eye of an infant after delivery. Gonococcal conjunctivitis can still be transmitted by sexual contact, however, necessitating treatment with systemic and topical medications.

The microorganism Chlamydia trachomatis is responsible for trachoma, a disease in which the conjunctiva and cornea can become scarred, leading to blindness. Trachoma is the leading cause of preventable blindness in the world and is especially prevalent in the Middle East, Asia, and parts of Africa. Inclusion conjunctivitis, so called because of the small bodies that are observed within ("included in") the infected cells, is also caused by C. trachomatis. This disease occurs in newborns, who become infected when passing through the birth canal, and in sexually active adults, who often simultaneously contract gonorrheal infections. Antibiotic treatment is usually effective.

Conjunctivitis frequently results from an allergic reaction to topical eye medications or to airborne allergens such as hay fever pollen. Prominent symptoms include eyelid swelling, itching, eye redness, and a stringy mucoid discharge. Cool compresses and artificial eye lubrication are of benefit, and many anti-allergy medications are available. Vernal conjunctivitis is an allergic inflammation that tends to recur in the conjunctivas of susceptible (usually male) children. There are two types of vernal conjunctivitis. In one, the lining of the upper eyelid is affected, with a characteristic red pebbled appearance. In the second type, the inflammation is manifested by separate yellowish elevations on the conjunctiva near the cornea. Treatment is similar to other cases of allergic conjunctivitis.

A severe form of conjunctivitis that may culminate in blindness occasionally accompanies erythema multiforme, an eruption on the skin and mucous membranes that sometimes occurs in association with a systemic infection or the use of certain medications.Variations are classified either as continuous, or quantitative (smoothly grading between two extremes, with the majority of individuals at the centre, as height varies in human populations); or as discontinuous, or qualitative (composed of well-defined classes, as blood groups vary in humans). A discontinuous variation with several classes, none of…croton oil,   poisonous viscous liquid obtained from the seeds of a small Asiatic tree, Croton tiglium, of the spurge family (Euphorbiaceae). The tree is native to or cultivated in India and the Indonesian Archipelago. Croton oil is pale yellow to brown and is transparent, with an acrid persistent taste and disagreeable odour. Highly toxic and a violent irritant, it was formerly used as a drastic purgative and counter-irritant in human and veterinary medicine but is now considered too dangerous for medicinal use. The use of croton oil as a drug apparently originated in China. It was introduced to the West by the Dutch in the 16th century.cyclone,  any large system of winds that circulates about a centre of low atmospheric pressure in a counterclockwise direction north of the Equator and in a clockwise direction to the south. Cyclonic winds move across nearly all regions of the Earth except the equatorial belt and are generally associated with rain or snow. Also occurring in much the same areas are anticyclones, wind systems that rotate about a high-pressure centre. Anticyclones are so called because they have a flow opposite to that of cyclones-i.e., an outward-spiralling motion, with the winds rotating clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and counterclockwise in the Southern. These winds are usually not as strong as the cyclonic variety and commonly produce no precipitation. A brief treatment of cyclones follows. For full treatment, see climate: Cyclones and anticyclones.

Cyclones occur chiefly in the middle and high latitude belts of both hemispheres. In the Southern Hemisphere, where most of the terrestrial surface is covered by the oceans, cyclones are distributed in a relatively uniform manner through various longitudes. Characteristically, they form in latitudes 30° to 40° S and move in a generally southeasterly direction, reaching maturity in latitudes around 60°. The situation is quite different in the Northern Hemisphere. There, continental landmasses extend from the Equator to the Arctic, and large mountain belts interfere with the midlatitude air currents, giving rise to significant variations in the occurrence of cyclones (and anticyclones). Certain tracks are favoured by the wind systems. The principal cyclone tracks lie over the oceans, regularly traversing to the east of both mountain barriers and continental coastlines.

Cyclones that form closer to the Equator (i.e., at latitudes 10° to 25° north and south over the oceans) differ somewhat in character from the extratropical variety. Such wind systems, known as tropical cyclones, are much smaller in diameter. Whereas extratropical cyclones range from nearly 1,000 to 4,000 km (620 to 2,500 miles) across, tropical cyclones typically measure only about 100 to over 1,000 km in diameter. They also tend to be more violent than those occurring in the midlatitudes and can cause considerable damage. Their wind velocities may reach up to 90 metres per second (200 miles per hour), as opposed to a maximum of about 30 metres per second (67 miles per hour) for extratropical cyclones. In the Atlantic and Caribbean regions, tropical cyclones with winds of at least 33 metres per second (74 miles per hour) averaged over one-minute intervals are called hurricanes, while in the western Pacific and China Sea, the term typhoon is applied.

The word cyclone is also used colloquially to refer to much smaller rotating phenomena, such as tornadoes and dust devils-which may, in fact, rotate in an anticyclonic direction.… known as CTNS, which encodes cystinosin, a protein that normally transports cystine out of cellular organelles called lysosomes. When the gene is mutated, however, it produces a dysfunctional form of cystinosin. The extent to which the protein’s functional capacity is affected depends on the specific mutation involved; for example, severe…cytokinesis,  in biology, the process by which one cell physically divides into two cells. Cytokinesis represents the major reproductive procedure of unicellular organisms, and it occurs in the process of embryonic development and tissue growth and repair of higher plants and animals. It generally follows nuclear doubling, whether in mitosis or in meiosis. Prokaryotes reproduce principally by binary fission, in which the mother cell enlarges until it divides into two identical daughter cells, with cytokinesis representing the physical division into the two daughter cells.

In animal cells cytokinesis is achieved through the constriction of the cell by a ring of contractile microfilaments consisting of actin and myosin, the proteins involved in muscle contraction and other forms of cell movement. In plant cells the cytoplasm is divided by the formation of a new cell wall, called the cell plate, between the two daughter cells. Once the daughter cells are separated, cellulose synthesis begins, and the cell plate becomes a primary cell wall.The hydrobromide salt of dextromethorphan occurs as white crystals or a white crystalline powder, soluble in water, alcohol, and chloroform. It acts upon the central nervous system to suppress the cough reflex. The drug does not produce addiction or central depression, as do a number of…
diastereoisomer,  either member of a pair of substances that differ with respect to the configurations of their molecules (i.e., stereoisomers) and that lack a mirror-image relationship (i.e., are not enantiomers). An example is the pair consisting of either of the two optically active forms of tartaric acid (either the dextrorotatory or levorotatory form) and the optically inactive meso form of the same acid (mesotartaric acid). Unlike enantiomers, diastereoisomers need not have closely similar physical and chemical properties; they may differ as greatly as do structural isomers. For example, either of the optically active tartaric acids melts at 187° C (369° F), whereas mesotartaric acid melts at 143 °C (290 °F).Another type is the diffuser, which scatters the light from the bulb so that it falls evenly across the film. Light sources and optical systems are chosen depending on the type of film being used and the characteristics desired on the enlarged print. Condensers are used for prints with……interactions discussed here is the dipole–dipole interaction between polar molecules. It will be recalled that a polar molecule has an electric dipole moment by virtue of the existence of partial charges on its atoms. Opposite partial charges attract one another, and, if two polar molecules are orientated so that the…
disaccharide,  any substance that is composed of two molecules of simple sugars (monosaccharides) linked to each other. Disaccharides are crystalline water-soluble compounds. The monosaccharides within them are linked by a glycosidic bond (or glycosidic linkage), the position of which may be designated α- or β- or a combination of the two (α-,β-). Glycosidic bonds are cleaved by enzymes known as glycosidases. The three major disaccharides are sucrose, lactose, and maltose.

Sucrose, which is formed following photosynthesis in green plants, consists of one molecule of glucose and one of fructose bonded via an α-,β-linkage. Lactose (milk sugar), found in the milk of all mammals, consists of glucose and galactose connected by a β-linkage. Maltose, a product of the breakdown of starches during digestion, consists of two molecules of glucose connected via an α-linkage. Another important disaccharide, trehalose, which is found in single-celled organisms and in many insects, also consists of two molecules of glucose and an α-linkage, but the linkage is distinct from the one found in maltose.…sometimes enter the bloodstream, causing disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI) in virtually any organ system. In both male and female, arthritis is the most common manifestation of DGI. The process usually settles in one or two joints and may result in permanent disability in the absence of treatment. Involvement of the…do not resuscitate order (DNR order),  an advance medical directive that requests that doctors do not attempt cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) if a person’s heart or breathing stops. A do not resuscitate (DNR) order is placed on the individual’s medical chart, and sometimes a coloured "Do Not Resuscitate" bracelet is put on the person’s wrist. If a person with a DNR order undergoes a respiratory or cardiac arrest, doctors and caregivers must abide by the directive, and the individual is likely to die. A DNR order may be written for individuals in a hospital or nursing home or for patients living at home.

A DNR order does not mean that no medical assistance will be given. For example, emergency care and other health care providers may continue to administer oxygen therapy, control bleeding, position for comfort, and provide pain medication and emotional support. However, they will not initiate cardiac monitoring or administer chest compressions, artificial respiration, defibrillation, or cardioversion. If an individual with a DNR order is at home or in a nursing home, staff and emergency medical personnel will not perform CPR or transfer the patient to a hospital for resuscitation.

A DNR order may be applied before, during, or after a cardiac or respiratory arrest. If individuals are considered rational and able to communicate their wishes in a clear manner, they may write their own advance directives indicating a desire for a DNR order. Such orders should be written into a living will or health care power of attorney and discussed with family members. In the United States, a state-sponsored form must also be filled out and cosigned by the physician for the order to be legally valid. If individuals cannot express their own wishes and cannot give informed consent, the authority to make such decisions passes to a surrogate decision maker, such as a legal guardian, spouse, or parent, who signs it in the presence of witnesses and the doctor. Often there are conflicts between surrogate decision makers and other family members or friends who disagree about the treatment the individuals would have wanted.

Doctors often discuss the need for DNR orders as part of a hospice plan for the very elderly or those with terminal diseases, such as end-stage cancer. Ideally, DNR orders are discussed with all patients for whom cardiopulmonary arrest would be the terminal event in their illness and for whom CPR would be unsuccessful or inappropriate. Given that CPR is traumatic, people who ask for a DNR order in such circumstances often express a desire to "let nature take its course."

Controversially, some doctors may raise the issue of DNR orders with people who are disabled or who are likely to become disabled. Disability rights activists argue that disability is not an automatic justification for a DNR order and claim that it is wrong to assume that people will have a lower quality of life simply because they are or will be disabled. Many of those activists condemn doctors who promote DNR orders as a reasonable medical response to disability.dominance,  in genetics, greater influence by one of a pair of genes (alleles) that affect the same inherited character. If an individual pea plant with the alleles T and t (T = tallness, t = shortness) is the same height as a TT individual, the T allele (and the trait of tallness) is said to be completely dominant. If the T t individual is shorter than the T T but still taller than the t t individual, T is said to be partially or incompletely dominant; i.e., it has a greater influence than t but does not completely mask the presence of t, which is said to be recessive.

In ecology, the term dominance is used to describe a species of animal or plant that exerts the most influence on other species of its community because its members are the most abundant or the largest.

In animal behaviour, a ruling animal in a social grouping is described as dominant.…are called lobular carcinomas and ductal carcinomas. Because these tissues are glandular, both cancers are called adenocarcinomas. The most common type of tumour, called infiltrating ductal carcinoma, is a single, hard, barely movable lump. This type of tumour accounts for about 70 percent of all cases. Fewer than 15 percent…There are two distinct types: eccrine glands open by a duct directly onto the skin surface; apocrine glands usually develop in association with hair follicles and open into them.     For the efficient emission or detection of photons, it is often necessary to constrain these processes to very thin semiconductor layers. These thin layers, grown atop bulk semiconductor wafers, are called epitaxial layers because their crystallinity matches that of the substrate even though… esophageal cancer,  disease characterized by the abnormal growth of cells in the esophagus, the muscular tube connecting the oral cavity with the stomach. There are two types of esophageal cancer: squamous cell carcinoma, which develops from epithelial cells lining the esophagus, and adenocarcinoma, which originates in glandular cells. While squamous cell carcinoma accounts for the majority of cases of esophageal cancer globally, adenocarcinoma is on the rise in Western countries. Men are more than twice as likely to develop esophageal cancer as women, and, while Blacks are more likely to develop squamous cell carcinoma than whites, whites are more likely to develop adenocarcinoma. In the 21st century esophageal cancer was the sixth most common cause of cancer-related death worldwide.

Several risk factors have been identified that increase the likelihood of developing esophageal cancer. Some factors, such as age, sex, and race, are impossible to control. However, tobacco and alcohol use increase risk, and these behaviours can be controlled. People who accidentally swallowed lye as children also have a higher risk of esophageal cancer as adults. Long-term problems with acid reflux may lead to a condition called Barrett esophagus, in which the normal squamous cells that line the esophagus are replaced with glandular cells; this condition increases cancer risk. Rare disorders such as tylosis, achalasia, and Plummer-Vinson syndrome are also risk factors.

Esophageal cancers are usually diagnosed once symptoms have appeared, but by this time the cancer has usually developed to a relatively advanced stage. Symptoms may include difficulty or pain when swallowing, pain or tightness in the chest, unexplained weight loss, hoarseness, or frequent hiccups.

If cancer is suspected, a thorough examination is conducted to determine its type and stage. The esophagus is visually examined with an endoscope, and tissue samples are taken for biopsy. Several imaging methods are frequently used, such as chest X rays, computed tomography (CT) scans, or ultrasound. There is no definitive laboratory test for esophageal cancer.

Once esophageal cancer has been diagnosed, its stage is determined to indicate how far the cancer has progressed. Stage 0 esophageal cancer is also called carcinoma in situ and is confined to the inner layer of epithelial cells lining the esophagus. Stage I cancers have spread into the connective tissue layer below the epithelium but have not invaded the underlying muscle layer. Stage II cancers either have spread through the muscle layer to the outer boundaries of the esophagus or have spread only into the muscle layer but have reached nearby lymph nodes. Stage III esophageal cancers have spread through the esophageal wall to the lymph nodes or other local tissues. Stage IV cancers have metastasized, or spread, to distant organs such as the stomach, liver, bone, or brain.

The survival rate for esophageal cancer is lower than for many other cancers. When the cancer is detected before it has invaded the underlying tissue layers of the esophagus, five-year survival is high, but fewer than 25 percent of esophageal cancers are diagnosed at this stage. If the cancer has moved to the tissue immediately underlying the mucosal surface, five-year survival is reduced to about 50 percent, and the rate drops significantly once the cancer has moved from the esophagus to nearby lymph nodes or other tissues. Once the cancer has spread to distant tissues in the body, five-year survival is extremely low.

Esophageal cancers are best treated surgically when possible. If the cancer is confined to the upper region of the esophagus, an esophagectomy may be done to remove the cancerous portion, along with nearby lymph nodes, and to reconnect the remaining esophagus to the stomach. For cancers of the lower esophagus, it may be necessary to perform an esophagogastrectomy, in which a portion of the esophagus is removed along with a portion of the stomach. The stomach is then reattached directly to the remaining esophagus, or a segment of the colon is used to link the stomach and esophagus. Both of these surgeries are difficult and often result in serious complications. Other, less-drastic surgeries may be used to relieve symptoms, especially when surgical cure is not possible.

Treatment with radiation alone does not cure esophageal cancer, but it may be used either before surgery to shrink the size of the tumour or following surgery to destroy remaining cancer cells. Radiation therapy is also used to relieve symptoms. The side effects of radiation treatment include vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, and esophageal irritation. Chemotherapy is also used for some esophageal cancers. It is not curative, but it can relieve some symptoms and may be able to shrink tumours prior to surgery. Side effects resemble those of radiotherapy.

Esophageal cancer cannot be completely prevented, but risk can be lowered by reducing alcohol consumption and avoiding tobacco. Individuals who are at high risk should receive regular screening in order to increase the probability of early detection. Because there is no blood test available for esophageal cancer, screening requires regular biopsies and viewing of the esophagus with an endoscope.estrus,  the period in the sexual cycle of female mammals, except the higher primates, during which they are in heat-i.e., ready to accept a male and to mate. One or more periods of estrus may occur during the breeding season of a species. Prior to ovulation the endometrium (uterine lining) thickens, in preparation for holding the fertilized ova. As the proliferation of uterine tissue reaches its peak, receptivity is highest-this is the estrous period. Some animals (e.g., dogs) are monestrous, having only one heat during a breeding season. Others (e.g., ground squirrels) are polyestrous: if not impregnated, they will come into heat repeatedly during the breeding season. Males can recognize a female in heat by smell; certain substances (pheromones) are secreted only at this portion of her cycle. The female’s genital area may be swollen during estrus, and she may show by a variety of behavioral signals that she is ready to mate.The external sphincter is a layer of voluntary (striated) muscle encircling the outside wall of the anal canal and anal opening. One can cause it to expand and contract at will, except during the early years of life when it is not yet fully developed. Nerves…These symptoms, which are called extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS), resemble those of Parkinson disease and include tremor of the limbs, bradykinesia (slowness of movement with loss of facial expression, absence of arm-swinging during walking, and a general muscular rigidity), dystonia (sudden sustained contraction of muscle groups, causing abnormal postures), feedback,   in biology, a response within a system (molecule, cell, organism, or population) that influences the continued activity or productivity of that system. In essence, it is the control of a biological reaction by the end products of that reaction.

Similar usage prevails in mathematics, particularly in several areas of communication theory. In every instance, part of the output is fed back as new input to modify and improve the subsequent output of a system. See also cybernetics. feline leukemia,  viral disease of cats, one of the most serious diseases affecting domestic cats and a few other Felidae. The disease occurs worldwide. Signs include enlargement of the lymph nodes, depression, emaciation, and, frequently, diarrhea; there is no known treatment, and the outcome is usually fatal. A fluorescent antibody test developed in the 1970s produced evidence that the virus is present in many apparently healthy cats. Preventive vaccines are available. The disease can spread among animals; however, there is no proved connection with leukemia in humans.…innermost layer of neurons, the ganglion cells; and the transmitted messages are carried out of the eye along their projections, or axons, which constitute the optic nerve fibres. Thus, the optic nerve is really a central tract, rather than a nerve, connecting two regions of the nervous system, namely, the……rocks, thereby completing a full cycle of the transfer of matter from an old continent to a young ocean and ultimately to the formation of new sedimentary rocks. Knowledge of the processes of interaction of the atmosphere and the hydrosphere with the surface rocks and soils of the Earth’s crust…geomorphic cycle,  theory of the evolution of landforms. In this theory, first set forth by William M. Davis between 1884 and 1934, landforms were assumed to change through time from "youth" to "maturity" to "old age," each stage having specific characteristics. The initial, or youthful, stage of landform development began with uplift that produced fold or block mountains. Upon dissection by streams, the area would reach maturity and, ultimately, would be reduced to an old-age surface called a peneplain, with an elevation near sea level. The cycle could be interrupted by uplift during any period of the life cycle and thus returned to the youthful stage; this return is called rejuvenation. The geomorphic cycle could be applied to all landforms such as hillslopes, valleys, mountains, and river drainage systems. It was assumed that, if the stage of a landform was known, its history followed directly according to a predetermined framework.

Though Davis acknowledged that rock type, structure, and the processes of erosion play a part in landform determination, he emphasized that time was the primary factor. It is now believed that time is no more important in landform development than the other factors. The cycle-of-erosion theory has long been accepted in the face of accumulating quantitative data that refutes it. It is generally held now that the initial conditions-or uplift-in a region do not necessarily predetermine the end products. Rather, there tends to be an eventual attainment of dynamic equilibrium between landforms and the processes that act upon them. When this happens, the physiographic history of a region is "erased."…result is known as a glacier fluctuation-in this case an advance-and it incorporates the sum of all the changes that have taken place up-glacier during the time it took them to propagate to the terminus.Golgi apparatus,  membrane-bound organelle of eukaryotic cells (cells with clearly defined nuclei) that is made up of a series of flattened, stacked pouches called cisternae. The Golgi apparatus is responsible for transporting, modifying, and packaging proteins and lipids into vesicles for delivery to targeted destinations. It is located in the cytoplasm next to the endoplasmic reticulum and near the cell nucleus. While many types of cells contain only one or several Golgi apparatus, plant cells can contain hundreds.

Secretory proteins and glycoproteins, cell membrane proteins, lysosomal proteins, and some glycolipids all pass through the Golgi apparatus at some point in their maturation. In plant cells, much of the cell wall material passes through the Golgi as well.

The Golgi apparatus itself is structurally polarized, with three primary compartments lying between the "cis" face and the "trans" face. These faces are biochemically distinct, and the enzymatic content of each segment is markedly different. The cis face membranes are generally thinner than the others.

In general, the Golgi apparatus is made up of approximately four to eight cisternae, although in some single-celled organisms it may consist of as many as 60 cisternae. The cisternae are held together by matrix proteins, and the whole of the Golgi apparatus is supported by cytoplasmic microtubules. The three primary compartments of the apparatus are known generally as "cis" (cisternae nearest the endoplasmic reticulum), "medial" (central layers of cisternae), and "trans" (cisternae farthest from the endoplasmic reticulum). Two networks, the cis Golgi network and the trans Golgi network, which are made up of the outermost cisternae at the cis and trans faces, are responsible for the essential task of sorting proteins and lipids that are received (at the cis face) or released (at the trans face) by the organelle.

The proteins and lipids received at the cis face arrive in clusters of fused vesicles. These fused vesicles migrate along microtubules through a special trafficking compartment, called the vesicular-tubular cluster, that lies between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus. When a vesicle cluster fuses with the cis membrane, the contents are delivered into the lumen of the cis face cisterna. As proteins and lipids progress from the cis face to the trans face, they are modified into functional molecules and are marked for delivery to specific intracellular or extracellular locations. Some modifications involve cleavage of oligosaccharide side chains followed by attachment of different sugar moieties in place of the side chain. Other modifications may involve the addition of fatty acids or phosphate groups (phosphorylation) or the removal of monosaccharides.

The different enzyme-driven modification reactions are specific to the compartments of the Golgi apparatus. For example, the removal of mannose moieties occurs primarily in the cis and medial cisternae, whereas the addition of galactose or sulfate occurs primarily in the trans cisternae. In the final stage of transport through the Golgi apparatus, modified proteins and lipids are sorted in the trans Golgi network and are packaged into vesicles at the trans face. These vesicles then deliver the molecules to their target destinations, such as lysosomes or the cell membrane.

Some molecules, including certain soluble proteins and secretory proteins, are carried in vesicles to the cell membrane for exocytosis (release into the extracellular environment). The exocytosis of secretory proteins may be regulated, whereby a ligand must bind to a receptor to trigger vesicle fusion and protein secretion. In addition, within the vesicles are proteases that cut many secretory proteins at specific amino acid positions. This often results in activation of the secretory protein, an example being the conversion of inactive proinsulin to active insulin by removing a series of amino acids.

Some secretory proteins will cease to be transported if their carbohydrate groups are modified incorrectly or are not permitted to form. In some cases the carbohydrate groups are necessary for the stability or activity of the protein or for targeting the molecule for a specific destination.     Each living thing exhibits polarity, one example of which is the differentiation of an organism into a head, or forward part, and a tail, or hind part. Regenerating parts are no exception; they exhibit polarity by always growing in a distal direction (away… … known as influenza A subtype H2N2. Research has indicated that this virus was a reassortant (mixed species) strain, originating from strains of avian influenza and human influenza viruses. In the 1960s the human H2N2 strain underwent a series of minor genetic modifications, a process known as antigenic drift. These slight…
Stratton built in 1898 a harmonic analyzer having 80 components. Each of these was capable of generating a sinusoidal motion, which could be multiplied by constant factors by adjustment of a fulcrum on levers. The components were added by means of springs to produce a resultant. Another milestone in the…    The term heavy charged particle refers to those energetic particles whose mass is one atomic mass unit or greater. This category includes alpha particles, together with protons, deuterons, fission fragments, and other energetic heavy particles often produced in accelerators. These particles carry… …the anterior end, called the Hensen’s node.…ceramic conductors are the so-called high Tc superconductors, materials that lose their resistance at much higher critical temperatures than their metal alloy counterparts. Most high Tc ceramics are layered structures, with two-dimensional copper-oxygen sheets along which superconduction takes place. The first of these was discovered in 1986 by the Swiss…
…sea cucumbers (Holothuroideae) produce the holothurinogenins, a group of lanosterol derivatives toxic to nerve tissue. An example of a holothurinogenin (13) is shown here.human leukocyte antigen (HLA),  any of the numerous antigens (substances capable of stimulating an immune response) involved in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) in humans. The HLA genes encode the cell-surface proteins that are part of the MHC.

HLA antigens are programmed by a highly variable gene complex consisting of more than 200 genes, all of which occur on chromosome 6. HLA genes are divided into three distinct groups: class I, class II, and class III. The possibility of numerous variations in these genes serves a key role in providing the immune system with the ability to defend against a wide range of antigens.

The HLA system is useful in tissue typing, in which tissues from one individual are analyzed to determine whether they can be successfully transplanted to another individual. A number of HLA genes are associated with human diseases, including certain autoimmune disorders and cancer.…them; such atoms are called interstitials. Thermal vibrations may cause an atom to leave its original crystal site and move into a nearby interstitial site, creating a vacancy-interstitial pair. Vacancies and interstitials are the types of defects found in a pure crystal. In another defect, called an impurity, an atom…
The force increases (pleural pressure becomes more negative) as the lung is stretched and its volume increases during inspiration. The force also increases in proportion to the rapidity with which air is drawn into the lung and decreases in proportion to the force with which air is expelled…
…that may be used is intravenous immunoglobulin, which involves the injection into a vein of a concentrate of pooled antibodies. Immunotherapy can help reduce symptom severity and duration, especially when initiated 7 to 14 days after symptoms first emerge.isoniazid,  drug used in the treatment and prevention of tuberculosis. Isoniazid commonly is used in combination with other drugs, such as rifampin, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, or streptomycin; these drugs are used with isoniazid in order to prevent, or at least delay, the development of isoniazid-resistant strains of tuberculin bacilli. Treatment usually is continued for many months. The most important drug in the therapy of tuberculosis, isoniazid was introduced into medicine in 1952; it usually is administered orally, but it can be given by injection. Side effects may include hepatitis (especially in older patients), peripheral neuropathy, dizziness, and headache.Phylum LabyrinthulomycotaFound in both salt water and fresh water in association with algae and other chromists; feeding stage comprises an ectoplasmic network and spindle-shaped or spherical cells that move within the network by gliding over one another; contains about 45 species in 10 genera.Order…The Langlands conjectures, or Langlands Program, grew out of a 1967 letter that Robert Langlands wrote to André Weil, who was widely regarded as the leading number theorist of his generation. Langlands suggested a far-reaching generalization of what was already known concerning a deep connection between……plants and bottom-dwelling animals; (2) limnetic, the water open to effective light penetration, supporting plant and animal plankton; and (3) profundal, the bottom and deepwater area beyond light penetration, supporting dark-adapted organisms.
The other, called lobate, is exemplified by the older Holocene deltas of the Mississippi River system. Both of these high-constructive types have a large sediment supply relative to the marine processes that tend to disperse sediment along the shoreline. Normally, elongate deltas have a higher mud content than…
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),  three-dimensional diagnostic imaging technique used to visualize organs and structures inside the body without the need for X-rays or other radiation. MRI is valuable for providing detailed anatomical images and can reveal minute changes that occur over time. It can be used to detect structural abnormalities that appear in the course of a disease as well as how these abnormalities affect subsequent development and how their progression correlates with mental and emotional aspects of a disorder. Since MRI poorly visualizes bone, excellent images of the intracranial and intraspinal contents are produced.

During an  MRI procedure, the patient lies inside a massive hollow cylindrical magnet and is exposed to a powerful steady magnetic field. Different atoms in the portion of the body being scanned resonate to different frequencies of magnetic fields. MRI is used primarily to detect the oscillations of hydrogen atoms, which contain a proton nucleus that spins and thus can be thought of as possessing a small magnetic field. In MRI a background magnetic field lines up all the hydrogen atoms in the tissue being imaged. A second magnetic field, oriented differently from the background field, is turned on and off many times per second; at certain pulse rates, the hydrogen atoms resonate and line up with this second field. When the second field is turned off, the atoms that were lined up with it swing back to align with the background field. As they swing back, they create a signal that can be picked up and converted into an image.

Tissue that contains a large amount of hydrogen, which occurs abundantly in the human body in the form of water, produces a bright image, whereas tissue that contains little or no hydrogen (e.g., bone) appears black. The brightness of an MRI image is facilitated by the use of a contrast agent such as gadodiamide, which patients ingest or are injected with prior to the procedure. Although these agents can improve the quality of images from MRI, the procedure remains relatively limited in its sensitivity. Techniques to improve the sensitivity of MRI are being developed. The most promising of these techniques involves the use of para-hydrogen, a form of hydrogen with unique molecular spin properties that are highly sensitive to magnetic fields.

Refinement of the magnetic fields used in MRI has led to the development of highly sensitive imaging techniques, such as diffusion MRI and functional MRI, that are designed to image very specific properties of tissues. In addition, magnetic resonance angiography, a unique form of MRI technology, can be used to produce an image of flowing blood. This permits the visualization of arteries and veins without the need for needles, catheters, or contrast agents. As with MRI, these techniques have helped revolutionize biomedical research and diagnosis.

Advanced computer technologies have made it possible for radiologists to construct holograms that provide three-dimensional images from the digital cross sections obtained by conventional MRI scanners. These holograms can be useful in locating lesions precisely. MRI is particularly valuable in imaging the brain, the spinal cord, pelvic organs such as the urinary bladder, and cancellous (or spongy) bone. It reveals the precise extent of tumours rapidly and vividly, and it provides early evidence of potential damage from stroke, allowing physicians to administer proper treatments early. MRI also has largely supplanted arthrography, the injection of dye into a joint to visualize cartilage or ligament damage, and myelography, the injection of dye into the spinal canal to visualize spinal cord or intervertebral disk abnormalities.

Because patients must lie quietly inside a narrow tube, MRI may raise anxiety levels in patients, especially those with claustrophobia. Another disadvantage of MRI is that it has a longer scanning time than some other imaging tools, including computerized axial tomography (CAT). This makes MRI sensitive to motion artifacts and thus of less value in scanning the chest or abdomen. Because of the strong magnetic field, MRI cannot be used if a pacemaker is present or if metal is present in critical areas such as the eye or the brain. See also magnetic resonance.mast seeding,  the production of many seeds by a plant every two or more years in regional synchrony with other plants of the same species. Since seed predators commonly scour the ground for each year’s seed crop, they often consume most of the seeds produced by many different plant species each year. Mast seeding is an effective defense because the seed predators become satiated before all the seeds have been consumed. The consequence of mast seeding for the organization of a plant community is that, instead of a few new seedlings establishing themselves every year, major pulses occur over time, during which new plants become established and old plants die. Many conifers in boreal forests exhibit mast seeding, as do other species, such as bamboos. Some bamboo species grow for 100 years or more before producing seeds. Then all at once the bamboo plants over a large geographic region will set seed and die in the same year.The metathalamus is composed of the medial and lateral geniculate bodies, or nuclei. Fibres of the optic nerve end in the lateral geniculate body, which consists of six cellular laminae, or layers, folded into a horseshoe configuration. Each lamina represents a complete map of the contralateral…meteor and meteoroid,  respectively, a glowing streak in the sky (meteor) and its cause, which is a relatively small stony or metallic natural object from space (meteoroid) that enters Earth’s atmosphere and heats to incandescence. In modern usage the term meteoroid, rather than being restricted to objects entering Earth’s atmosphere, is applied to any small object in orbit around the Sun having the same nature as those that result in meteors.

When a meteoroid enters Earth’s atmosphere, it is traveling at very high velocity-more than 11 km per second (25,000 miles per hour) at minimum, which is many times faster than a bullet leaving a gun barrel. Frictional heating, produced by the meteoroid’s energetic collision with atmospheric atoms and molecules, causes its surface to melt and vaporize and also heats the air around it. The result is the luminous phenomenon recognized as a meteor. Popular synonyms for meteors include shooting stars and falling stars. The vast majority of meteoroids that collide with Earth burn up in the upper atmosphere. If a meteoroid survives its fiery plunge through the atmosphere and lands on Earth’s surface, the object is known as a meteorite.

The term meteoroid is usually reserved for chunks of matter that are approximately house-sized-i.e., some tens of metres across-and smaller. Meteoroids are believed to be mostly fragments of asteroids and comets and are placed, with them, in the category of solar system objects known as small bodies. A few meteoroids also have come from the Moon, Mars, Vesta, and possibly Mercury. The smallest meteoroids, those less than a few hundred micrometres across (about the size of a period on a printed page), are called interplanetary dust particles or micrometeoroids.

The terms meteoroid and meteor (and meteorite as well) are sometimes confusingly interchanged in common usage. Meteor in particular is often applied to a meteoroid hurtling through space, to an incandescent meteoroid (rather than just its luminous streak) in the atmosphere, or to an object that has hit the ground or a human-made object. An example of the last case is found in the name Meteor Crater, a well-known impact structure in Arizona, U.S.migmatite,  in geology, rock composed of a metamorphic (altered) host material that is streaked or veined with granite rock; the name means "mixed rock." Such rocks are usually gneissic (banded) and felsic rather than mafic in composition; they may occur on a regional scale in areas of high-grade metamorphism.

Many migmatites probably represent the partial fusion of the metamorphic host during extreme metamorphism; the components of the rock with the lower melting temperatures are fused and gather to produce the streaks of granite. The migmatites of some Precambrian metamorphic terrains may be the result of this process. Migmatite also can form near large intrusions of granite when some of the magma is injected into the neighbouring metamorphic rocks.molecular weight,  mass of a molecule of a substance, based on 12 as the atomic weight of carbon-12. It is calculated in practice by summing the atomic weights of the atoms making up the substance’s molecular formula. The molecular weight of a hydrogen molecule (chemical formula H2) is 2 (after rounding off); for many complex organic molecules (e.g., proteins, polymers) it may be in the millions.mucus,  viscous fluid that moistens, lubricates, and protects many of the passages of the digestive and respiratory tracts in the body. Mucus is composed of water, epithelial (surface) cells, dead leukocytes, mucin, and inorganic salts. Mucus is produced by mucous cells, which are frequently clustered into small glands located on the mucous membrane that lines virtually the entire digestive tract. Large numbers of mucous cells occur in the mouth, where mucus is used both to moisten food and to keep the oral membranes moist while they are in direct contact with the air. Mucus in the nose helps to trap dust, bacteria, and other small inhaled particles. The stomach also has large numbers of mucous cells. Gastric mucus forms a layer about one millimetre thick that lines the stomach, protecting the organ from highly acidic gastric juice and preventing the juice from digesting the stomach itself.…form what is called a muonic molecule. In 1956 American physicist Luis W. Alvarez and his collaborators were the first to observe muon-catalyzed fusion.…the upper region of the neural tube to close in early embryonic development, specifically within the first month of pregnancy. (The neural tube is the primitive structure from which develops the central nervous system.) Females are more likely to be affected than males. Insufficient maternal intake of folic acid is…nucleolus,  spherical body within the nucleus of most eukaryotic cells, involved in the synthesis of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and the formation of ribosomes. Nucleoli appear shortly after mitosis and form around specific repeating chromosome regions, known as nucleolar organizing regions, within the nucleus. A single nucleus can house one to several nucleoli, depending on the organism and cell type.

The nucleolus contains the genes that encode rRNA. Each ribosome contains ribosomal proteins, which are synthesized in the cytoplasm, and at least one large molecule of rRNA and at least one small molecule of rRNA, which are synthesized in the nucleolus. To form new ribosomes, ribosomal proteins are transported to the nucleolus and there combined with the large and small rRNA molecules, creating the large and small subunits of the ribosome. These subunits are then returned to the cytoplasm for final assembly into functional ribosomes.

In addition to its importance in ribosome biogenesis, the nucleolus contains a number of proteins with no known role in ribosome formation, which suggests that the nucleolus may have additional functions. It is possible that the nucleolus plays a role in the regulation of mitosis and the progression of the cell cycle, and it is thought to be involved with the cell’s response to stress.Because electrons in glass molecules are confined to particular energy levels, they cannot absorb and reemit photons (the basic units of light energy) by skipping from one energy band to another and back again. As a consequence, light energy travels through glass… ozonolysis,  a reaction used in organic chemistry to determine the position of a carbon-carbon double bond in unsaturated compounds. It involves the reaction of the compound with ozone leading to the formation of an ozonide, and the ozonide yields on hydrogenation or treatment with acid a mixture containing aldehydes, ketones, or carboxylic acids. From the determination of the structure of the aldehydes and ketones so produced, it is possible to determine the position of the double bond in the original unsaturated compound.

Ozonolysis has been used very extensively in the determination of the structure of natural products, particularly the terpenes. It has also been used in the study of the structure of aromatic compounds and for the synthesis of rare aldehydes and ketones. Thus, oleic acid on ozonolysis yields n-nonanal (pelargonic aldehyde) and azelaic semialdehyde.…in the molecule, called the parent. The alkane shown has seven carbons in its longest chain and is therefore named as a derivative of heptane, the unbranched alkane that contains seven carbon atoms. The position of the CH3 (methyl) substituent on the seven-carbon chain is specified by a number (3-),…Pavlovian conditioning,  a type of conditioned learning which occurs because of the subject’s instinctive responses, as opposed to operant conditioning, which is contingent on the willful actions of the subject. It was developed by the Russian physiologist Ivan Petrovich Pavlov (q.v.). See also conditioning.peridotite,   a coarse-grained, dark-coloured, heavy, intrusive igneous rock that contains at least 10 percent olivine, other iron- and magnesia-rich minerals (generally pyroxenes), and not more than 10 percent feldspar. It occurs in four main geologic environments: (1) interlayered with iron-, lime-, and magnesia-rich rocks in the lower parts of tabular-layered igneous complexes or masses; (2) in alpine-type mountain belts as irregular, olivine-rich masses, with or without related gabbro; (3) in volcanic pipes (funnels, more or less oval in cross section, that become narrower with increasing depth) as kimberlite; and (4) as dikes (tabular bodies injected in fissures) and irregular masses with rocks exceptionally rich in potash and soda. The layered complexes are believed to have been formed in place by selective crystallization and crystal settling from a previously intruded fluid or magma; the remaining types seem to have ranged from fluid magmas to semisolid crystal mushes at the time of emplacement. See also dunite; kimberlite.

Peridotite is the ultimate source of all chromium ore and naturally occurring diamonds, and of nearly all chrysotile asbestos. It is one of the main host rocks of talc deposits and platinum metals and formerly was a major source of magnesite. Fresh dunite is used in parts of glass furnaces. Nearly all peridotite is more or less altered to serpentine and is cut by many irregular shear surfaces; in warm, humid climates peridotite and serpentine have weathered to soils and related deposits that, though now worked on a relatively small scale, are enormous potential sources of iron, nickel, cobalt, and chromium. …antihistamines (an aniline derivative called Antergan) was discovered. Subsequently, compounds that were more potent, more specific, and less toxic were prepared, including the H1 receptor antagonists diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, promethazine, and loratidine.
…the DNA sequence of bacteriophage ΦX174, the first complete genome to be sequenced.
physiology,  study of the functioning of living organisms, animal or plant, and of the functioning of their constituent tissues or cells.

The word physiology was first used by the Greeks around 600 bce to describe a philosophical inquiry into the nature of things. The use of the term with specific reference to vital activities of healthy humans, which began in the 16th century, also is applicable to many current aspects of physiology. In the 19th century, curiosity, medical necessity, and economic interest stimulated research concerning the physiology of all living organisms. Discoveries of unity of structure and functions common to all living things resulted in the development of the concept of general physiology, in which general principles and concepts applicable to all living things are sought. Since the mid-19th century, therefore, the word physiology has implied the utilization of experimental methods, as well as techniques and concepts of the physical sciences, to investigate causes and mechanisms of the activities of all living things.

The philosophical natural history that comprised the physiology of the Greeks has little in common with modern physiology. Many ideas important in the development of physiology, however, were formulated in the books of the Hippocratic school of medicine (before 350 bce), especially the humoral theory of disease-presented by a philosopher, Nemesius, in the treatise De natura hominis (4th century ce; On the Nature of Man). Other contributions were made by Aristotle and Galen of Pergamum. Significant in the history of physiology was the teleology of Aristotle, who assumed that every part of the body is formed for a purpose and that function, therefore, can be deduced from structure. The work of Aristotle was the basis for Galen’s De usu partium corporis humani (On the Usefulness of the Parts of the Body) and a source for many early misconceptions in physiology. The tidal concept of blood flow, the humoral theory of disease, and Aristotle’s teleology, for example, led Galen into a basic misunderstanding of the movements of blood that was not corrected until English physician William Harvey’s work on blood circulation in the 17th century.

The publication in 1628 of Harvey’s Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus (An Anatomical Dissertation upon the Movement of the Heart and Blood in Animals) usually is identified as the beginning of modern experimental physiology. Harvey’s study was based only on anatomical experiments; despite increased knowledge in physics and chemistry during the 17th century, physiology remained closely tied to anatomy and medicine. In 1747 in Berne, Switzerland, Albrecht von Haller, eminent as anatomist, physiologist, and botanist, published the first manual for physiology. Between 1757 and 1766 he published eight volumes entitled Elementa Physiologiae Corporis Humani (Elements of Human Physiology); all were in Latin and characterized his definition of physiology as anatomy in motion. At the end of the 18th century, Antoine Lavoisier wrote about the physiological problems of respiration and the production of heat by animals in a series of memoirs that still serve as a foundation for understanding these subjects.

Physiology as a distinct discipline utilizing chemical, physical, and anatomical methods began to develop in the 19th century. Claude Bernard in France; Johannes Müller, Justus von Liebig, and Carl Ludwig in Germany; and Sir Michael Foster in England may be numbered among the founders of physiology as it now is known. At the beginning of the 19th century, German physiology was under the influence of the romantic school of Naturphilosophie. In France, on the other hand, romantic elements were opposed by rational and skeptical viewpoints. Bernard’s teacher, François Magendie, the pioneer of experimental physiology, was one of the first men to perform experiments on living animals. Both Müller and Bernard, however, recognized that the results of observations and experiments must be incorporated into a body of scientific knowledge, and that the theories of natural philosophers must be tested by experimentation. Many important ideas in physiology were investigated experimentally by Bernard, who also wrote books on the subject. He recognized cells as functional units of life and developed the concept of blood and body fluids as the internal environment (milieu intérieur) in which cells carry out their activities. This concept of physiological regulation of the internal environment occupies an important position in physiology and medicine; Bernard’s work had a profound influence on succeeding generations of physiologists in France, Russia, Italy, England, and the United States.

Müller’s interests were anatomical and zoological, whereas Bernard’s were chemical and medical, but both men sought a broad biological viewpoint in physiology rather than one limited to human functions. Although Müller did not perform many experiments, his textbook Handbuch der Physiologie des Menschen für Vorlesungen (1837) and his personal influence determined the course of animal biology in Germany during the 19th century.

It has been said that, if Müller provided the enthusiasm and Bernard the ideas for modern physiology, Carl Ludwig provided the methods. During his medical studies at the University of Marburg in Germany, Ludwig applied new ideas and methods of the physical sciences to physiology. In 1847 he invented the kymograph, a cylindrical drum used to record muscular motion, changes in blood pressure, and other physiological phenomena. He also made significant contributions to the physiology of circulation and urine secretion. His textbook of physiology, published in two volumes in 1852 and 1856, was the first to stress physical instead of anatomical orientation in physiology. In 1869 at Leipzig, Ludwig founded the Physiological Institute (neue physiologische Anstalt), which served as a model for research institutes in medical schools worldwide. The chemical approach to physiological problems, developed first in France by Lavoisier, was expanded in Germany by Justus von Liebig, whose books on Organic Chemistry and its Applications to Agriculture and Physiology (1840) and Animal Chemistry (1842) created new areas of study both in medical physiology and agriculture. German schools devoted to the study of physiological chemistry evolved from Liebig’s laboratory at Giessen.

The British tradition of physiology is distinct from that of the continental schools. In 1869 Sir Michael Foster became Professor of Practical Physiology at University College in London, where he taught the first laboratory course ever offered as a regular part of instruction in medicine. The pattern Foster established still is followed in medical schools in Great Britain and the United States. In 1870 Foster transferred his activities to Trinity College at Cambridge, England, and a postgraduate medical school emerged from his physiology laboratory there. Although Foster did not distinguish himself in research, his laboratory produced many of the leading physiologists of the late 19th century in Great Britain and the United States. In 1877 Foster wrote a major book (Textbook of Physiology), which passed through seven editions and was translated into German, Italian, and Russian. He also published Lectures on the History of Physiology (1901). In 1876, partly in response to increased opposition in England to experimentation with animals, Foster was instrumental in founding the Physiological Society, the first organization of professional physiologists. In 1878, again due largely to Foster’s activities, the Journal of Physiology, which was the first journal devoted exclusively to the publication of research results in physiology, was initiated.

Foster’s teaching methods in physiology and a new evolutionary approach to zoology were transferred to the United States in 1876 by Henry Newell Martin, a professor of biology at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. The American tradition drew also on the continental schools. S. Weir Mitchell, who studied under Claude Bernard, and Henry P. Bowditch, who worked with Carl Ludwig, joined Martin to organize the American Physiological Society in 1887, and in 1898 the society sponsored publication of the American Journal of Physiology. In 1868 Eduard Pflüger, professor at the Institute of Physiology at Bonn, founded the Archiv für die gesammte Physiologie, which became the most important journal of physiology in Germany.

Physiological chemistry followed a course partly independent of physiology. Müller and Liebig provided a stronger relationship between physical and chemical approaches to physiology in Germany than prevailed elsewhere. Felix Hoppe-Seyler, who founded his Zeitschrift für physiologische Chemie in 1877, gave identity to the chemical approach to physiology. The American tradition in physiological chemistry initially followed that in Germany; in England, however, it developed from a Cambridge laboratory founded in 1898 to complement the physical approach started earlier by Foster.

Physiology in the 20th century was a mature science; during a century of growth, physiology became the parent of a number of related disciplines, of which biochemistry, biophysics, general physiology, and molecular biology are the most vigorous examples. Physiology, however, retains an important position among the functional sciences that are closely related to the field of medicine. Although many research areas, especially in mammalian physiology, have been fully exploited from a classical-organ and organ-system point of view, comparative studies in physiology may be expected to continue. The solution of the major unsolved problems of physiology will require technical and expensive research by teams of specialized investigators. Unsolved problems include the unravelling of the ultimate bases of the phenomena of life. Research in physiology also is aimed at the integration of the varied activities of cells, tissues, and organs at the level of the intact organism. Both analytical and integrative approaches uncover new problems that also must be solved. In many instances, the solution is of practical value in medicine or helps to improve the understanding of both human beings and other animals.…to more-specialized methods such as play therapy. In the latter, play activities are used as the primary basis for communication between the child and the psychotherapist. Play activities enable children to express their feelings, thoughts, wishes, and fears more freely and easily than they can through purely verbal communication.…which it refers is called Poiseuille flow.    Also called polyoxymethylene (POM) or simply acetal, polyacetal has the simplest structure of all the polyethers. It is manufactured in a solution process by anionic or cationic chain-growth polymerization of formaldehyde (H2C=O), a reaction analogous to vinyl polymerization. By itself, the polymer is unstable… …cold period, known as the Pretiglian and based on pollen data from the Netherlands, began about 2.3 million years ago, soon after extensive ice-rafted material first appears in North Atlantic deep-sea cores. The Pretiglian was followed by a succession of warm and cold intervals, which also are based on pollen…
protogalaxy,   in cosmology, vast cloud of gas that by contraction and condensation becomes a galaxy of stars. In evolutionary ("big-bang") models of creation, protogalaxies appear early in the expansion phase of the universe; in the steady-state model they are slowly but continually forming from newly created matter.quantum,  in physics, discrete natural unit, or packet, of energy, charge, angular momentum, or other physical property. Light, for example, appearing in some respects as a continuous electromagnetic wave, on the submicroscopic level is emitted and absorbed in discrete amounts, or quanta; and for light of a given wavelength, the magnitude of all the quanta emitted or absorbed is the same in both energy and momentum. These particle-like packets of light are called photons, a term also applicable to quanta of other forms of electromagnetic energy such as X rays and gamma rays. Submicroscopic mechanical vibrations in the layers of atoms comprising crystals also give up or take on energy and momentum in quanta called phonons.

All phenomena in submicroscopic systems (the realm of quantum mechanics) exhibit quantization: observable quantities are restricted to a natural set of discrete values. When the values are multiples of a constant least amount, that amount is referred to as a quantum of the observable. Thus Planck’s constant h is the quantum of action, and ℏ (i.e., h/2π) is the quantum of angular momentum, or spin. As previously noted, these depressions are similar to rift valleys, but they have been formed by the opposite process-crustal shortening. A ramp valley develops when blocks of crust are thrust toward one another and up onto an intervening crustal block. The latter is… …particular with molecules known as reactive oxygen species (ROS). This theory was first proposed in the 1950s by American gerontologist Denham Harman and was supported in part by evidence that antioxidant proteins, which neutralize free radicals, are more abundant in aging cells, indicating a response to oxidative stress.reserpine,  drug derived from the roots of certain species of the tropical plant Rauwolfia. The powdered whole root of the Indian shrub Rauwolfia serpentina historically had been used to treat snakebites, insomnia, hypertension (high blood pressure), and insanity. Reserpine, isolated in 1952, was the first of many Rauwolfia alkaloids found in the crude drug. Because the drug produces a profound and prolonged tranquilizing action, it was once used in treating schizophrenia. Reserpine is sometimes used in treating hypertension, though newer antihypertensive drugs with fewer central nervous system side effects are the preferred treatment.Rhaetian Stage,  uppermost of the three divisions of the Upper Triassic Series, representing those rocks deposited worldwide during Rhaetian time (208.5 million to 201.3 million years ago) in the Triassic Period. The stage name is derived from the Rhaetian Alps of Italy, Switzerland, and Austria; the stratotype is the Kössen beds at Kendelbachgraben, Sankt Wolfgang, Austria. Rhaetian rocks are transitional in age and sometimes placed in the Lower Jurassic. In Great Britain the Rhaetian (or Rhaetic) consists of lagoonal deposits, such as limestones, shales, and marls, as well as bone beds that contain fragments of amphibians and reptiles. Elsewhere Rhaetian marine strata are correlated worldwide by two distinct ammonoid cephalopod biozones, both of which have designated type localities in North America. Rhaetian rocks may also consist of shelf limestones with characteristic brachiopods, conodonts, and other shelly forms. The Rhaetian Stage underlies the Hettangian Stage of the Lower Jurassic Series and overlies the Norian Stage of the Upper Triassic Series.Roadian Stage,  first of the three stages of the Middle Permian (Guadalupian) Series, made up of all rocks deposited during the Roadian Age (272.3 million to 268.8 million years ago) of the Permian Period.

In 2001 the International Commission on Stratigraphy established the Global Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) defining the base of this interval within the limestone portion of the Cutoff Formation located in the Guadalupe Mountains of Texas, U.S. The GSSP coincides with the appearance of the conodont Jinogondolella nankingensis in the fossil record. Other important fossil organisms characteristic of the stage include ammonoids of the genera Demarezites and Waagenoceras.  Rocks of the Roadian Stage overlay those of the Kungurian Stage and sit below those of the Wordian Stage.Examples of Paramyxovirinae genera include Rubulavirus, which is composed of several species of human parainfluenza viruses and the mumps viruses; Avulavirus, which contains the species Newcastle disease virus (of poultry) as well as various avian paramyxoviruses; and Morbillivirus, which contains the agents that cause …structural block known as the Russian (or East European) Platform, dating from at least 540 million years ago, appear in the northwest. A second, related platform has a deep cover of sedimentary rocks that were laid later. The deepwater depression, generally considered to be a vast structural downwarp, is an…scale,  in zoology, small plate or shield forming part of the outer skin layers of certain animals. Scales provide protection from the environment and from predators. Fish scales are formed of bone from the deeper, or dermal, skin layer. The elasmobranchs (e.g., sharks) have placoid scales, which are bony, spiny projections with an enamel-like covering. Ganoid scales, which are found on such fishes as gars and the bowfin, are similar to placoid scales but are covered with a peculiar enamel-like substance called ganoin. It is thought that true teeth developed from placoid scales. The advanced fish have either cycloid scales (e.g., carp) or ctenoid scales (e.g., perch; sunfish). These are the typical overlapping fish scales. Cycloid scales are large, thin, and round or oval in shape, and they exhibit growth rings. Ctenoid scales resemble cycloid scales but have comblike teeth on their overlapping edge.

Horny scutes, or corneoscutes, derived from the upper, or epidermal, skin layer, appear in reptiles and on the legs of birds. In crocodilians and some lizards, bony dermal scales (osteoderms) underlie the external scales. Bird feathers are developmentally modified epidermal scales. Modified epidermal tissue, mostly made up of keratin, forms the scaly surface found on some mammals (e.g., rats; pangolins); however, although mammalian hair is also largely keratin, it is not a modified scale.

The term scale is also applied to modified body coverings on certain insects (e.g., moths).separation of variables,  one of the oldest and most widely used techniques for solving some types of partial differential equations. A partial differential equation is called linear if the unknown function and its derivatives have no exponent greater than one and there are no cross-terms-i.e., terms such as f f′ or f′f′′ in which the function or its derivatives appear more than once. An equation is called homogeneous if each term contains the function or one of its derivatives. For example, the equation f′ + f 2 = 0 is homogeneous but not linear, f′ + x2 = 0 is linear but not homogeneous, and fxx + fyy = 0 is both homogeneous and linear.

If a homogeneous linear equation in two variables has a solution f(x, y) that consists of a product of factors g(x) and h(y), each involving only a single variable, the solution of the equation can sometimes be found by substituting the product of these unknown factors in place of the unknown composite function, obtaining in some cases an ordinary differential equation for each variable. For example, if f(x, y) is to satisfy the equation fxx + fyy = 0, then by substituting g(x)h(y) for f(x, y) the equation becomes gxxh + ghyy = 0, or −gxx/g = hyy/h. Because the left side of the latter equation depends only on the variable x and the right side only on y, the two sides can be equal only if they are both constant. Therefore, −gxx/g = c, or gxx + cg = 0, which is an ordinary differential equation in one variable and which has the solutions g = a sin (xc1/2) and g = a cos (xc1/2). In a similar manner, hyy/h = c, and h = e±yc1/2. Therefore, 
f = gh = ae±yc1/2 sin (xc1/2)
and 
ae±yc1/2 sin (xc1/2)
are solutions of the original equation 
fxx + fyy = 0.
The constants a and c are arbitrary and will depend upon other auxiliary conditions (boundary and initial values) in the physical situation that the solution to the equation will have to satisfy. A sum of terms such as 
ae±yc1/2 sin (xc1/2)
with different constants a and c will also satisfy the given differential equation, and, if the sum of an infinite number of terms is taken (called a Fourier series), solutions can be found that will satisfy a wider variety of auxiliary conditions, giving rise to the subject known as Fourier analysis, or harmonic analysis.

The method of separation of variables can also be applied to some equations with variable coefficients, such as 
fxx + x2fy = 0,
and to higher-order equations and equations involving more variables.siren,   noisemaking device producing a piercing sound of definite pitch. Used as a warning signal, it was invented in the late 18th century by the Scottish natural philosopher John Robison. The name was given it by the French engineer Charles Cagniard de La Tour, who devised an acoustical instrument of the type in 1819. A disk with evenly spaced holes around its edge is rotated at high speed, interrupting at regular intervals a jet of air directed at the holes. The resulting regular pulsations cause a sound wave in the surrounding air. The siren is thus classified as a free aerophone. The sound-wave frequency of its pitch equals the number of air puffs (or holes times number of revolutions) per second. The strident sound results from the high number of overtones (harmonics) present. Spinal anesthesia (sometimes called spinal block) is produced when a local anesthetic agent, such as lidocaine or bivucaine, sometimes mixed with a narcotic, is injected into the cerebrospinal fluid in the lumbar region of the spine. This technique allows the woman to be… …pistils is said to be staminate, or male. When the same plant bears unisexual flowers of both sexes, it is said to be monoecious (e.g., tuberous begonia, hazel, oak, corn); when the male and female flowers are on different plants, the plant is dioecious (e.g., date, holly, cottonwood, willow); when…
…of a theory to which Stokes’s law (a special case of which is Green’s theorem) is central. The Gauss-Green-Stokes theorem, named after Gauss and two leading English applied mathematicians of the 19th century (George Stokes and George Green), generalizes the fundamental theorem of the calculus to functions of several variables.…
…and their oxidized products: Reactions), sulfenyl chlorides can be prepared by reaction of disulfides with equimolar quantities of chlorine. Sulfenyl chlorides readily add to olefins to produce chlorine-containing sulfides and react with amines to form sulfenamides, RSNR′2.swallowing,  the act of passing food from the mouth, by way of the pharynx (or throat) and esophagus, to the stomach. Three stages are involved in swallowing food.

The first begins in the mouth. There, food is mixed with saliva for lubrication and placed on the back of the tongue. The mouth closes, and the soft portion of the roof of the mouth (soft palate) rises so that the passageway between the nasal and oral cavities is closed off. The tongue rolls backward, propelling food into the oral pharynx, a chamber behind the mouth that functions to transport food and air.

Once food enters the pharynx, the second stage of swallowing begins. Respiration is temporarily inhibited as the larynx, or voice box, rises to close the glottis (the opening to the air passage). Pressure within the mouth and pharynx pushes food toward the esophagus. At the beginning of the esophagus there is a muscular constrictor, the upper esophageal sphincter, which relaxes and opens when food approaches. Food passes from the pharynx into the esophagus; the upper esophageal sphincter then immediately closes, preventing flow of food back into the mouth.

Once food is in the esophagus, the final phase of swallowing begins. The larynx lowers, the glottis opens, and breathing resumes. From the time food leaves the mouth until it passes the upper sphincter, only about one second of time elapses, during which all these body mechanisms spontaneously occur. After passing the upper sphincter, movements in the esophagus carry food to the stomach. Rhythmic muscular contractions (peristaltic waves) and pressure within the esophagus push the food downward. Folds in the esophageal wall stretch out as materials pass by them and again contract once they have passed. At the lower end of the esophagus, the lower esophageal sphincter relaxes and food enters the stomach; the sphincter then closes again to prevent reflux of gastric juices and food materials.

Swallowing is basically an involuntary reflex; one cannot swallow unless there is saliva or some substance to be swallowed. Initially, food is voluntarily moved to the rear of the oral cavity, but once food reaches the back of the mouth, the reflex to swallow takes over and cannot be retracted.

Swallowing is influenced by bodily position. Liquids swallowed when the body is in an upright or horizontal position flow by gravity rapidly to the stomach; in the head-down position, however, liquids remain at the beginning of the esophagus and several swallows and peristaltic waves may be necessary to evacuate the liquid. If a person swallows food connected to a string with counterweights attached outside of the body, he can only overcome 5 to 10 grams of weight resistance. Dogs can swallow food with a resistance of 50 to 500 grams. Essentially, the swallowing capacity of human beings is much weaker than that of other animals. The temperature of foods also affects a person’s swallowing capacity. Very cold liquids (1° to 3° C, or 34° to 37° F) slow down or completely stop peristaltic movement in the esophagus. In contrast, liquids at high temperature (58°–61° C, or 136°–142° F) increase peristaltic movements.

Afflictions affecting swallowing include paralysis of the pharynx, failure of the esophageal sphincters to open properly, and spastic contractions of the esophageal muscle walls. Any of these may be caused by physical or psychological complications. …heterocyclic sulfur compounds-such as thiophene, tetrathiafulvalene (TTF), and the bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene (BEDT-TTF) cation-as organic metals and superconductors (e.g., for use as switching elements and light-emitting diodes). Indeed, the 2000 Nobel Prize for Chemistry, awarded to American chemists Alan J. Heeger and Alan G. MacDiarmid and Japanese chemist Shirakawa Hideki, recognized the…thyroid tumour,  any of various benign tumours (adenomas) or malignant tumours (cancers) of the thyroid gland. Thyroid tumours are very common, and their frequency of occurrence increases with age. In the United States they are detected by physical examination in approximately 5 percent of the adult population and by ultrasound in approximately 40 percent of the adult population. In contrast, thyroid cancer is relatively rare; only about 0.5 percent of all cancer deaths occur from thyroid cancer. The peak incidence of thyroid cancer occurs at about 50 years of age, and women are affected about three times as often as men.

Most thyroid tumours are adenomas, which have a wide variation of cellular patterns. Most of the tumours have well-developed follicles; thus, they are collectively known as follicular adenomas. Most thyroid adenomas do not take up iodine or produce thyroid hormone; however, the main manifestation of a benign or malignant thyroid tumour is a painless mass in the neck.

The diagnosis of a nodule is confirmed by ultrasound. The only reliable way to distinguish between benign, and malignant nodules is by fine-needle aspiration (removal) of cells, the characteristics of which are examined under a microscope by a pathologist; however, sometimes this distinction can be made only by study of the entire nodule. Typically, 95 percent of nodules prove to be benign and 5 percent prove to be malignant. The benign nodules can be left alone; they enlarge only slightly, if at all, with time and can be removed surgically if they become bothersome to the patient. Malignant nodules, along with the entire thyroid gland, should be removed surgically to avoid potential metastasis (spread) to other sites of the body.

Most thyroid cancers are composed of mature-looking thyroid cells and grow very slowly. There are four types of thyroid cancer: papillary carcinoma, which accounts for about 90 percent of cases, and follicular carcinoma, anaplastic carcinoma, and medullary carcinoma, which together account for the remaining 10 percent of cases. Papillary and follicular carcinomas are very slow-growing tumours, and, while they can spread to lymph nodes in the neck, the lungs, or elsewhere, most patients are cured by a combination of surgery, radioactive iodine therapy, and thyroid hormone therapy. The only established risk factors for papillary carcinoma are external-beam radiation to the head and neck region and exposure to radioactive iodine in infants and children. In contrast to papillary and follicular carcinomas, anaplastic carcinomas are highly malignant and rapidly fatal. Medullary carcinomas are tumours of the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid gland and are somewhat more malignant than papillary or follicular carcinomas.…sequence, which they called the TOTE (test, operate, test, exit). In the TOTE sequence a goal is first planned, and a test is performed to determine whether the goal has been accomplished. If it has not been accomplished, operations are performed to achieve the goal. The test is performed again,…trade wind,  persistent wind that blows westward and toward the Equator from the subtropical high-pressure belts toward the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ). It is stronger and more consistent over the oceans than over land and often produces partly cloudy sky conditions, characterized by shallow cumulus clouds, or clear skies that make trade-wind islands popular tourist resorts. Its average speed is about 5 to 6 metres per second (11 to 13 miles per hour) but can increase to speeds of 13 metres per second (30 miles per hour) or more. The trade winds were named by the crews of sailing ships that depended on the winds during westward ocean crossings.Fully developed depressions appear once or twice per month. They travel from east to west more or less concurrently with high-level easterly waves and bursts of speed from the easterly jet, causing a local strengthening of the low-level monsoonal flow. The rainfall consequently increases and is much…
…groundwater; and tuff rings and tuff cones, which are landforms built of compacted pyroclastic deposits. Tuff rings and cones resemble maars, but they have higher rims and are not filled with water. Tuff rings are only about 5 metres (16 feet) high, with craters roughly at ground level. Tuff cones…Vicinal dihalides, compounds that have halogens on adjacent carbons, are prepared by the reaction between a halogen and an alkene. The simplest example is the reaction between ethylene and chlorine to give 1,2-dichloroethane (ethylene dichloride). 1,2-Dichloroethane leads all other organohalogen compounds in terms of its…von Willebrand factor (vWF, or VWF),  glycoprotein that plays an important role in stopping the escape of blood from vessels (hemostasis) following vascular injury. Von Willebrand factor (VWF) works by mediating the adherence of platelets to one another and to sites of vascular damage.

VWF binds to a protein complex made up of the glycoproteins Ib, IX, and V on the surfaces of platelets. The binding of VWF to this complex facilitates the activation and aggregation of platelets and the interaction of platelets with components such as collagen in the damaged vessel lining. These actions are important in the formation of a blood clot that halts bleeding.

VWF circulates in low concentrations in the plasma portion of blood and is made by cells in the bone marrow and by endothelial cells, which form the lining on the inside surface of blood vessels. The protein is activated by flowing blood and thus has the potential to stimulate the formation of blood clots even in the absence of vessel damage. In order to prevent unnecessary clotting, VWF is regulated by an enzyme known as ADAMTS13. When VWF is active, it exists in an unfolded form, which exposes its platelet-binding domains and thus allows it to bind to the glycoprotein complexes on platelets. However, unfolding also exposes cleavage sites for ADAMTS13, which cuts VWF into fragments that have little or no ability to bind to and activate platelets.

There are more than 300 mutations in the VWF gene that can cause von Willebrand disease, a condition characterized by reduced or delayed clot formation, which results in prolonged bleeding following vascular injury. Whereas some mutations are associated with only slightly reduced levels or activity of VWF, others are associated with drastic reductions leading to severe disease. In contrast, mutations that affect ADAMTS13 cause diseases characterized by excess clotting and have been associated with familial thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, a rare disorder involving abnormal blood coagulation.Witteberg series,   uppermost member of the Cape System of sedimentary rocks in South Africa. It consists of about 805 metres (2,640 feet) of shales and sandstones and is transitional between the Late Devonian epoch and the Early Carboniferous epoch (the Carboniferous began about 360,000,000 years ago). Fossil plants are prominent in Witteberg rocks: numerous genera have been described, including Sigillaria, Lepidodendron, Cyclostigma, and the psilophyte Dutoitia.…went by the name of chole.weightlifting,  sport in which barbells are lifted competitively or as an exercise.

For other activities using weights but distinct from weightlifting, see weight training, bodybuilding, and powerlifting.

Weightlifting has a lengthy history. For many prehistoric tribes, the traditional test of manhood was the lifting of a special rock. Such manhood stones, some with the name of the first lifter incised, exist in Greece and in Scottish castles. The competitive lifting of stones still persists locally in Germany, Switzerland, the highlands of Montenegro, and the Basque region of Spain. In many such events the consecutive number of lifts within a given time period is used to declare a winner.

The origins of modern weightlifting competition are to be found in the 18th- and 19th-century strong men, such as Eugene Sandow and Arthur Saxon of Germany, George Hackenschmidt of Russia, and Louis Apollon of France, who performed in circuses and theatres. By 1891 there was international competition in London. The revived Olympic Games of 1896 included weightlifting events, as did the Games of 1900 and 1904, but thereafter these events were suspended until 1920. In that year, at the suggestion of the International Olympic Committee, the International Weightlifting Federation (Fédération Haltérophile Internationale; FHI) was formed to regularize events and supervise international competition. By 1928 the one- and two-hand lifts of earlier Games had given way to only two-hand lifts: the snatch, the clean and jerk, and the clean and press (described below). The press was abandoned in 1972.

In the Games before World War II, the leading weightlifters were French, German, and Egyptian. After the war American weightlifters were dominant until 1953. Thereafter Soviet and Bulgarian weightlifters held a virtual monopoly on world records and championships. By the late 1990s the leading countries competing in weightlifting were Turkey, Greece, and China. World championships were held in 1922–23 and from 1937, except during the war years, and European championships were held from 1924 through 1936. A weightlifting competition for women was added to the Olympic Games in 2000.

The weight used in modern competitive lifting is the barbell, a steel bar or rod to which cast-iron or steel disk weights are attached at each end on a revolving sleeve. The range of weights added is 25, 20, 15, 10, 5, 2.5, and 1.25 kg (55, 44, 33, 22, 11, 5.5, and 2.75 pounds).

From 1928 to 1968 the three international lifts were the snatch, the clean and jerk, and the press (or clean and press). In all lifts the barbell rests on the floor initially. Lifts are performed on a wooden platform 4 metres (13.1 feet) square. If a lifter steps off the platform during a lift, the lift is not allowed.

In the snatch the barbell is lifted from the floor to arm’s length overhead in a single, continuous, explosive movement, with the lifter being permitted to move his feet or to squat under the barbell as he lifts it before recovering to an erect position. The clean and jerk is a two-part lift. After lifting the barbell to the shoulders, the lifter jerks it overhead to arm’s length, with no restrictions on the time necessary to complete the lift or on leg movements. In both lifts, the lifter must complete the lift with feet in line, body erect, arms and legs extended, and the barbell in control overhead. The lifter must either hold the weight overhead for two seconds or wait for the referee’s signal before lowering the barbell back to the floor.

The press was also a two-part lift. As in the clean and jerk, the barbell was brought to the lifter’s shoulders, the same foot motion being allowed. Then the lifter had to stand erect until the referee signaled for the completion of the lift, which was achieved by pressing the barbell upward in a steady continuous movement to arm’s length overhead but without any assistance by moving the legs.

Men’s competitions are divided into eight body-weight categories (upper limits given): 56 kg (123 pounds), 62 kg (137 pounds), 69 kg (152 pounds), 77 kg (170 pounds), 85 kg (187 pounds), 94 kg (207 pounds), 105 kg (231 pounds), and more than 105 kg.

For women there are seven weight divisions: 48 kg (106 pounds), 53 kg (117 pounds), 58 kg (128 pounds), 63 kg (139 pounds), 69 kg (152 pounds), 75 kg (165 pounds), and more than 75 kg.…of the first native Korean antivirus programs, which he named V1 (the V stood for "vaccine"), and distributed it free of charge to users. Later versions were similarly named V2 and V3.
…to the development of the APT (Automatically Programmed Tools) language for programming machine tools.biodiesel,  a biofuel made primarily from oily plants and algae and to a lesser extent from other oily sources (such as waste cooking fat from restaurant deep-frying). Biodiesel, which has found greatest acceptance in Europe, is used in diesel engines and is usually blended with petroleum diesel fuel in various percentages.  See also renewable energy.

Soybean and oil palm are common plants used in biodiesel production. The use of algae and cyanobacteria as sources for biodiesel holds promise but has been difficult to develop economically. Some algal species contain up to 40 percent lipids by weight, which can be converted into biodiesel or synthetic petroleum. Some estimates state that algae and cyanobacteria could yield between 10 and 100 times more fuel per unit area than plant-based biofuels.bookmobile,  shelf-lined motor van or other vehicle that carries books to rural and urban areas, establishes library service in areas that are too small to justify the creation of a stable branch, and acts as a demonstration model for communities that can afford library service and may choose to establish future stable branches. The earliest prototypes, which appeared in the 19th century in England and in the early 20th century in the United States, were horse-drawn book wagons. These provided service to individual homes, as well as to village centres.

The development of the more versatile automobile eventually made possible the commercial manufacture of specially designed, automated bookmobiles in the period after World War II. Their use spread to France, Germany, Scandinavia, the Soviet Union, Oceania, and other areas.

In a county or provincial library system, the bookmobile may serve as the only distributing agency, or as a substitute or supplement for book stations (book-deposit stops), places where books are left and picked up for readers (e.g., a store, post office, etc.). It can also provide door-to-door service to widely scattered populations with great flexibility in the number of stops, the length of distance covered, and uses. Bookmobiles have been used for servicing school districts, housing visual aids, and transporting educational exhibits. In some areas of the world, bookmobile service may be extended by phone or boat; e.g., Canadian libraries saw in bookmobiles a means of establishing contact with the Eskimos.…type of CD became available: CD-Recordable, or CD-R. These discs differ from regular CDs in having a light-sensitive organic dye layer which can be "burned" to produce a chemical "dark" spot, analogous to an ordinary CD’s pits, that can be read by existing CD and CD-ROM players. Such CDs are…
Chimera, or chimère, in architecture, is a term loosely used for any grotesque, fantastic, or imaginary beast used in decoration.
container ship,  oceangoing vessel designed to transport large, standard-sized containers of freight. Rail-and-road containers were used early in the 20th century; in the 1960s containerization became a major element in ocean shipping as well. Container ships, which are large and fast, carry containers above deck as well as below, and their cargoes can be loaded and unloaded rapidly.…extractor gradually gave way to continuous units in which fresh flakes are added continuously and subjected to a counterflow of solvent. One of the earliest continuous extractors, and a type still considered to be one of the best, was the Bollman or Hansa-Mühle unit from Germany, in which solvent percolates…      This is any process in which iron is extracted from ore at a temperature below the melting points of the materials involved. Gangue remains in the spongelike product, known as direct-reduced iron, or DRI, and must be removed in a subsequent steelmaking… 
…mainly to accommodate the revolutionary electromagnetic aircraft launch system, or EMALS. EMALS replaced the classic steam-powered catapult with a 100-metre- (330-foot-) long "linear synchronous motor," an electric motor containing a series of magnetic coils that accelerated the launcher and connected aircraft along the carrier’s deck. Electromagnetic launching reduced stress on……are known as EPM (ethylene-propylene monomer) and the latter as EPDM (ethylene-propylene-diene monomer). The copolymers contain approximately 60 percent by weight ethylene. A pronounced advantage of EPDM is that the residual carbon-carbon double bond (i.e., the double bond that remains after polymerization) is attached to the polymer chain rather……the aircraft was named the F-22 Raptor and was first flown in 1997. In 1996 Boeing and Lockheed Martin received U.S. defense contracts to build competitive technology demonstrators for the Joint Strike Fighter, intended as an affordable, next-generation, multirole fighter for the armed services of the United States and Britain.……in three stages: face or section haulage, which transfers the coal from the active working faces; intermediate or panel haulage, which transfers the coal onto the primary or main haulage; and the main haulage system, which removes the coal from the mine. The fundamental difference between face, intermediate, and main…
Many basic devices must be manufactured in such a way that their behaviour can be modified by means of some external control. Generally, the same effect cannot be brought about (in practice and sometimes even in theory) by any intrinsic modification of the…      College students have been at the leading edge of the growing awareness of the centrality of intellectual property in a digital age. When American college student Shawn Fanning invented Napster in 1999, he set in motion an ongoing legal battle over digital rights.…  


Interposing a fluid film that completely separates sliding surfaces results in this type of lubrication. The fluid may be introduced intentionally, as the oil in the main bearings of an automobile, or unintentionally, as in the case of water between a smooth rubber… 
   The high-temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGR), as mentioned above in Fuel types, is fueled by a mixture of graphite and fuel-bearing microspheres. There are two competitive designs of this reactor type: (1) a German "pebble bed" system that uses spherical fuel elements, nominally… …to recognize what constitutes a hydraulic lime.internal-combustion engine,  any of a group of devices in which the reactants of combustion (oxidizer and fuel) and the products of combustion serve as the working fluids of the engine. Such an engine gains its energy from heat released during the combustion of the nonreacted working fluids, the oxidizer-fuel mixture. This process occurs within the engine and is part of the thermodynamic cycle of the device. Useful work generated by an internal-combustion (IC) engine results from the hot gaseous products of combustion acting on moving surfaces of the engine, such as the face of a piston, a turbine blade, or a nozzle.

Internal-combustion engines are the most broadly applied and widely used power-generating devices currently in existence. Examples include gasoline engines, diesel engines, gas-turbine engines, and rocket-propulsion systems.

Internal-combustion engines are divided into two groups: continuous-combustion engines and intermittent-combustion engines. The continuous-combustion engine is characterized by a steady flow of fuel and oxidizer into the engine. A stable flame is maintained within the engine (e.g., jet engine). The intermittent-combustion engine is characterized by periodic ignition of air and fuel and is commonly referred to as a reciprocating engine. Discrete volumes of air and fuel are processed in a cyclic manner. Gasoline piston engines and diesel engines are examples of this second group.

Internal-combustion engines can be delineated in terms of a series of thermodynamic events. In the continuous-combustion engine, the thermodynamic events occur simultaneously as the oxidizer and fuel and the products of combustion flow steadily through the engine. In the intermittent-combustion engine, by contrast, the events occur in succession and are repeated for each full cycle.

With the exception of rockets (both solid rocket motors and liquid-propellant rocket engines), internal-combustion engines ingest air, then either compress the air and introduce fuel into the air or introduce fuel and compress the air-fuel mixture. Then, common to all internal-combustion engines, the air-fuel mixture is burned, work is extracted from the expansion of the hot gaseous products of combustion, and ultimately the products of combustion are released through the exhaust system. Their operation can be contrasted with that of external-combustion engines (e.g., steam engines), in which the working fluid does not chemically react and energy gain is achieved solely through heat transfer to the working fluid by way of a heat exchanger.

The most common internal-combustion engine is the four-stroke, gasoline-powered, homogeneous-charge, spark-ignition engine. This is because of its outstanding performance as a prime mover in the ground transportation industry. Spark-ignition engines also are used in the aeronautics industry; however, aircraft gas turbines have become the prime movers in this sector because of the emphasis of the aeronautics industry on range, speed, and passenger comfort. The domain of internal-combustion engines also includes such exotic devices as supersonic combustion ramjet engines (scramjets), such as those proposed for hypersonic aircraft, and sophisticated rocket engines and motors, such as those used on U.S. space shuttles and other space vehicles.…Global Design Effort of the International Linear Collider, a proposed 19-mile- (31-kilometre-) long linear particle accelerator.…case the call is designated intraoffice), or it may lie in another central office (requiring an interoffice call). If the call is intraoffice, the central office switch will handle the entire call process. If the call is interoffice, it will be directed either to a nearby central office or to…
 Magnetic disks are coated with a magnetic material such as iron oxide. There are two types: hard disks made of rigid aluminum or glass, and removable diskettes made of flexible plastic. In 1956 the first magnetic hard drive (HD) was invented at…  Solid glass beads and microspheres used in blast cleaners, shot peening, and reflective paints can be made simply by passing finely fritted glass through a hot flame. Hollow microspheres, used mostly as low-density fillers, may be produced by one of many processes. In one… In the piston, or gooseneck, process the plunger and its cylinder are submerged in the molten metal, the metal being admitted through a hole in the top of the cylinder when the plunger is retracted; the advance of the plunger forces the metal into the die cavity…
…equation (33) is called the power factor. It is evident that the only element that can dissipate energy is the resistance.…design variables known as the power specific speed. In U.S. design practice this is given bywhere n is in revolutions per minute, P is the output in horsepower, and H is the head of water in feet. Turbine types can be classified by their specific speed, N, which always applies…Prechlorination, which is often the final step of pretreatment and a standard practice in many parts of the world, has been questioned by scientists. During the prechlorination process, chlorine is applied to raw water that may contain high concentrations of natural organic matter. This organic……are two basic types: the pressurized-water reactor (PWR) and the boiling-water reactor (BWR). In the PWR, water at high pressure and temperature removes heat from the core and is transported to a steam generator. There the heat from the primary loop is transferred to a lower-pressure secondary loop also containing…retaining wall,  freestanding wall that either resists some weight on one side or prevents the erosion of an embankment. It may also be "battered"-that is, inclined toward the load it is bearing.

There are a number of methods employed to resist the lateral force against such a wall. The most basic type of reinforced retaining wall is the gravity wall, which is of massive concrete that is prevented from falling over by simple gravity. The cantilever retaining wall has cantilever footings, which have tie beams balancing the asymmetrical load. A counterfort retaining wall is a cantilever wall with counterforts, or buttresses, attached to the inside face of the wall to further resist lateral thrust. Some common materials used for retaining walls are treated lumber, concrete block systems, poured concrete, stone, and brick.…mining techniques and needed initial roasting before smelting. At the same time, they were more widely available than surface deposits, and there were sources in both central and western Europe-ores in Germany, Austria, and the Czech and Slovak Republics were exploited from the early 3rd millennium bce. This long initial…His most important was the safety chain dog, or safety ratchet (patented in 1910), which prevented cars from rolling backward down the lift hill in the event the pull chain broke. It attached to the track and clicked onto the rungs of the chain. His underfriction wheels, or upstop wheels……inventor who built technically successful steam carriages a half century before the advent of the gasoline-powered automobile.streetcar,  vehicle that runs on track laid in the streets, operated usually in single units and usually driven by electric motor.

Early streetcars were either horse-drawn or depended for power on storage batteries that were expensive and inefficient. In 1834 Thomas Davenport, a blacksmith from Brandon, Vermont, U.S., built a small battery-powered electric motor and used it to operate a small car on a short section of track. In 1860 an American, G.F. Train, opened three lines in London and one line in Birkenhead. The system was called tramways in Britain and was established at Salford in 1862 and Liverpool in 1865. The invention of the dynamo (generator) led to the application of transmitted power by means of overhead electrified wires to streetcar lines, which subsequently proliferated in Britain, Europe, and the United States.

The cable car, the invention of Andrew Hallidie, was introduced in San Francisco on Sacramento and Clay streets in 1873. The cars were drawn by an endless cable running in a slot between the rails and passing over a steam-driven shaft in the powerhouse. The system was well-adapted for operation on steep hills and reached its most extensive use in San Francisco and Seattle. The cars operated more smoothly than did early electric cars, but they could run only at a constant speed; breaking or jamming of the cable tied up all the cars on the line. Beginning about 1900, most cable trackage was replaced by electric cars; but the Seattle lines lasted until the 1930s, and a portion of the San Francisco system continued in operation in the 21st century.

During the 1890s and the first two decades of the 1900s, conventional electric tramlines replaced horsecar lines in Europe and the United States and made their appearance in the larger cities of Asia, Africa, and South America. In the United States, electric streetcars replaced horse-drawn cars at a particularly rapid rate from 1902 to 1917. The motors and cars were gradually improved: the tiny four-wheeled cars were replaced by heavy eight-wheeled cars that had much greater carrying capacity, and wooden car bodies were replaced by steel ones. The possession of a streetcar line became essential for a growing town or small city, and the larger city streetcar systems extended their lines farther and farther out into the suburbs. The development of streetcars in Europe was equally rapid and continued over a longer period. Many European cities constructed highly efficient streetcar systems, and the electric car became the chief means of urban transport.

British trams usually were double-deck cars operated by two men, one of whom collected the fare; rates were charged according to a zone system. European streetcars were similar to the British, but single-deck cars were common. Power was supplied from overhead wires through a bent piece called a bow or by a collapsible and adjustable frame called a pantograph, in contrast to the universal use of the single trolley pole in the United States. In Britain a conduit system was sometimes used in place of the overhead wires. It consisted of an underground conduit with a continuous slot that contained two conductor rails from which the tram’s contacts collected power.

During the World War I period, streetcar enterprises encountered financial difficulties; as wage and materials costs rose, the companies were squeezed by the fixed fares set almost universally by the municipal franchises. Finally, government action permitted fare raises; but by then the use of automobiles had spread, and many cities shifted to motor-bus systems of public transportation. The direct operating expenses of the bus, per mile, were greater than those of streetcars, but the heavy expenses of track construction and maintenance ultimately rendered streetcars uneconomical. In the United States streetcars began to be supplanted by automobiles and buses in the 1930s, and this trend accelerated during the ’40s and ’50s. In Britain the substitution of buses for trams was hastened during the 1930s by the development of improved double-deck buses, and by the early ’50s there were no trams left running in London. The last major British tram system was that of Glasgow, which employed relatively modern double-deck cars. Paris closed the last of its streetcar lines in the 1930s, and in other parts of France and in Italy many cities shifted to bus operation.

Nevertheless, there are still many major streetcar systems in operation, with many cities building new systems beginning in the late 20th century. Streetcar systems are largely municipal, with private bus competition not permitted. In the 1980s some cities in the United States began adopting light rail transit; the trackage for this modern electric trolley system was less expensive to construct than that for elevated or underground metropolitan train systems. Light rail systems were constructed in such American cities as San Diego, Sacramento, and San Jose, California; Portland, Oregon; and Buffalo, New York. In the early 21st century, increased traffic congestion and the need to revive downtown areas led to increased interest in the streetcar, with new systems being built in some American cities, such as Houston, Texas; Tampa, Florida; and Washington, D.C.…fighter-bomber version, known as the Strike Eagle, a weapons officer seated behind the pilot controls the delivery of a number of guided missiles and bombs. The Strike Eagle carried out much of the nighttime precision bombing of Iraqi installations during the Persian Gulf War of 1990–91.Strobane,  (trademark), of a chlorine-containing organic compound used as an insecticide. See toxaphene.…projectile’s velocity, and the "taper-bore" or "squeeze-bore" gun proved formidable. Guns with tapering calibres of 28/20, 41/29, and 75/55 millimetres were developed, but wartime shortages of tungsten led to their abandonment after 1942. In 1944 Britain perfected "discarding-sabot" projectiles, in which a tungsten core was supported in a conventional…
…growth and its relation to technological innovation. Romer’s work shed light on the ways in which technological advances that help sustain economic growth are generated in human economic activities and showed that persistent growth requires government intervention in the form of investment in research and development (R & D) and…Both Thaddeus S.C. Lowe of New Hampshire and John La Mountain of New York combined entertainment with long-distance test flights. Both men also employed balloons as aerial observation platforms for the Union army.
The second type is the tilt wing. In these aircraft, the wing is rotated to point the propellers vertically for takeoff and landing, then adjusted for horizontal flight by bringing the wing to a normal angle of attack. The third is the tilt duct, in which propellers shrouded in ducts…
It is composed of projecting triglyphs (units each consisting of three vertical bands separated by grooves) that alternate with receding square panels, called metopes, that may be either plain or carved with sculptured reliefs. The Roman forms of the Doric order have smaller proportions and appear lighter and more graceful…ventilating,   the natural or mechanically induced movement of fresh air into or through an enclosed space. The supply of air to an enclosed space involves the removal of a corresponding volume of expired air, which may be laden with odours, heat, noxious gases, or dust resulting from industrial processes.

The hazards of poor ventilation were not clearly understood until the early 20th century. Carbon dioxide accumulation, once thought to be the major cause of illness resulting from poor ventilation, has since been revealed to have a minimal effect under most circumstances. A more immediate problem is posed by the increased temperatures and humidity generated by the bodily warmth and exhalations of human occupants.

Natural ventilation results from thermal effects, such as those from a flue, or may be caused by wind, or both. These forces are small and often variable. Their effectiveness is aided by opening or closing windows.

Much greater control can be achieved with mechanical ventilation systems. They typically include a fan (from the standard propeller or disk type to the quieter centrifugal type), a heater, and a filter to remove particulate matter. A mechanically powered inlet of air, when combined with a natural exhaust, tends to cause a slight positive pressure within an enclosed space, so that the air leakage is outward. If such a system is installed in a hospital or in an internal office in a factory having a dust- or fume-laden atmosphere, the office will remain essentially contamination-free.

A mechanical exhaust with a natural air inlet causes a slight negative pressure, so that air leakages are inward. In many cases this type of ventilating system is used to discourage the escape of fumes or smells into surrounding areas of a building. Examples of such systems occur in laboratories forming part of a college teaching block, in a hotel kitchen adjacent to restaurant areas, and in toilet accommodations generally. In industry, compartments and areas that generate grinding dust, paint spray, fumes, and smoke are similarly treated; these undesirable contaminants are then confined to the spaces in question, leaving surrounding areas free from pollution.…extent after the Italian double-barreled Villar Perosa, or VP, a 1915 innovation that fired so fast it emptied its magazine in two seconds. The Germans identified their weapon, the first true submachine gun, as the MP18, or the Bergmann Muskete. This weapon was first issued in 1918, the last year……van in 1950 and the Karmann Ghia coupe in 1955. Sales abroad were generally strong in most countries of export, but, because of the car’s small size, unusual rounded appearance, and historical connection to Nazi Germany, sales in the United States were initially sluggish. The car began to gain acceptance…
…electrical engineer who invented the Williams tube store, a cathode-ray-tube memory system that heralded the beginning of the computer age.In addition, Anaya wrote A Chicano in China (1986), a nonfiction account of his travels; short stories, such as those in Serafina’s Stories (2004) and The Man Who Could Fly and Other Stories (2006); and a number of children’s books, as well as plays and poems. An advocate of…His first novels, A Modern Lover (1883) and A Mummer’s Wife (1885), introduced a new note of French Naturalism into the English scene, and he later adopted the realistic techniques of Gustave Flaubert and Honoré de Balzac. Esther Waters (1894), his best novel, deals with the plight of……societies with his massive work A Secular Age, published in 2007. A Secular Age tracks some of the major changes in Christian belief in Western societies during the last five centuries, examining how it has come to be that modern individuals can understand themselves, their society, and the natural world…Booth returned for the tearjerker About Mrs. Leslie (1954), playing the lover of a tycoon (Robert Ryan). In 1955 Mann helmed The Rose Tattoo, with a screenplay by Williams. It featured Italian actress Anna Magnani, in her Hollywood debut, as a grieving widow; Lancaster was the truck driver who revives…Acehnese,  one of the main ethnic groups on the island of Sumatra, Indonesia. They were estimated to number roughly 4.2 million in the early 21st century. They speak a language of the Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) family.

The Acehnese were ruled by Indian princes prior to 500 ce, and in the 13th century they became the first people in the Southeast Asian archipelago to adopt Islam. After expelling the Portuguese in the 17th century, the sultanate of Aceh (Acheh; Atjeh) was dominant in northern Sumatra until 1904, when the sultanate was conquered by the Dutch. Although part of the Republic of Indonesia since 1949, the Acehnese have remained restive. Their territory is administered as a special autonomous district, within which a strong separatist movement has continued to operate in the 21st century.

Traditional Acehnese dwellings, which prevail in some areas, consist of a three-room structure of wood raised high above the ground on pilings. Descent is traced through both the maternal and paternal lines. The position of women is high, and a married couple typically goes to live with the bride’s family. Women do not wear veils, although they do cover their hair. Their traditional dress consists of a skirt over trousers, a jacket and scarf, and many ornaments. Acehnese menswear includes a jacket or shoulder cloth and trousers of great width.…million acres in total-became Roman ager publicus (public land), subject to rent. Some of this property remained in the hands of local peoples, but large tracts in excess of the 500-iugera limit were occupied by wealthy Romans, who were legally possessores (i.e., in possession of the land, although not its……tribes, the feuding al-Khazraj and al-Aws, whom Muhammad had been asked to reconcile when he was still a rising figure in Mecca. They came to be his devoted supporters, constituting three-fourths of the Muslim army at the Battle of Badr (624 ce). When no one of their number was chosen…
…started his own bimonthly magazine, Al-Samīr ("The Companion"), which he expanded into a daily newspaper in 1936 and continued to publish until his death. He spent much of his life in the United States.…destruction of the Confederate ironclad Albemarle in the Roanoke River, N.C., in October 1864. This vessel, which had done much damage to Union naval forces, was at anchor when Cushing, in a steam launch, eluded the Confederate lookout and exploded against the ship a spar torpedo with such success that…Alexandrian Museum,  ancient centre of classical learning at Alexandria in Egypt. A research institute that was especially noted for its scientific and literary scholarship, the Alexandrian Museum was built near the royal palace about the 3rd century  bce possibly by Ptolemy I Soter (reigned 323–285/283 bce).

The best surviving description of the museum is by the Greek geographer and historian Strabo, who mentions that it was a large complex of buildings and gardens with richly decorated lecture and banquet halls linked by porticos, or colonnaded walks. It was organized in faculties with a president-priest at the head; the salaries of the scholars on the staff were paid by the Egyptian king and later by the Roman emperor. The renowned Library of Alexandria formed a part of the museum. In 272 ce the buildings of the museum were destroyed in the civil war under the Roman emperor Aurelian, although the educational and research functions of the institution seem to have continued until the 5th century.…narrative lifted from real life, Ali (2001), with Will Smith as the boxer Muhammad Ali.His major work, the Altar of the Virgin (c. 1505–10) in Herrgotts Church at Creglingen, is a wood altar, 32 feet (10 metres) high, depicting the life of Mary. Riemenschneider employed numerous assistants on the massive monument, but he executed the dominant life-size figures himself. Other major works are…Okri’s other works included An African Elegy (1992), a collection of poems that urges Africans to overcome the forces of chaos within their countries, and the long poem Mental Flight (1999). Other volumes of poetry included Wild (2012), Rise Like Lions: Poetry for the Many (2018), and A Fire……and that same year founded Anagran Inc., which also developed IP routers. He received the Charles Stark Draper Prize from the National Academy of Engineering in 2001.Angels in the Outfield (1951), however, was a solid baseball fantasy, with Paul Douglas as the manager of the basement-dwelling Pittsburgh Pirates, who start winning after heavenly intervention. Brown directed a segment of It’s a Big Country (1951) and then made When in Rome (1952),…Annunciation,  in Christianity, the announcement by the angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary that she would conceive a son by the power of the Holy Spirit to be called Jesus (Luke 1:26–38). The angel’s pronouncement is met with Mary’s willing consent ("Here am I, the servant of the Lord; let it be with me according to your word"), and thus precipitates the Incarnation of Christ and his redemption of the world.

The Feast of the Annunciation, one of the principal feasts of the Christian church, is celebrated on March 25 (Lady Day), nine months before Christmas. The first authentic allusions to the feast (apart from the Gelasian and Gregorian sacramentaries, in both of which it is mentioned) are in acts of the Council of Toledo (656) and of the Trullan Council (692). Because its significance is much more than narrative, the Annunciation had a particularly important place in the arts and church decoration of the early Christian and medieval periods and in the devotional art of the Renaissance and Baroque.…of the 3rd-century Roman roadbook Itinerarium Antonini and have been occupied by Spain since 1847. Waterless and uncultivated, they form the best anchorage along the Moroccan Mediterranean coast. Isabella II contains the lighthouse and garrison. Congreso and Rey are uninhabited.Apabhramsha language,  literary language of the final phase of the Middle Indo-Aryan languages. When the Prakrit languages were formalized by literary use, their variations came to be known as Apabhramsha. Despite this close relationship, scholars generally treat Apabhramsha and the nonliterary Prakrits separately.

The Middle Indo-Aryan languages are differentiated from Old Indo-Aryan-the Classical Sanskrit used in the Vedas-by significant changes in phonology and morphology. Conservative grammarians branded all such departures as apabhramsha ("deviance"). Patanjali (2nd century bce), for instance, identified Prakrit words such as gavi and goni as apabhramsha of the Sanskrit word go.

The Brahman sage Bharata mentions in his Natyashastra (1st century bce–3rd century ce) two types of vernacular, the Prakrits (bhasas) and their corruptions (vibhasas), in the dialects spoken by the Sabara, Abhira, and Candala peoples. In the late 6th or early 7th century, Dandin said that in poetry the languages of the Abhira and other common folk were called Apabhramsha. These commentaries imply that by the 3rd century there were certain dialects called Apabhramsha and that these gradually rose to the literary level.

By the 6th century, Apabhramsha was recognized as a literary language. Dharasena II, the king of Valabhi at that time, created an inscription in which he described his father, Guhasena, as an expert in composing poetry in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Apabhramsha. Bhamaha, an early prosodist of the 6th or 7th century, divides poetry into Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Apabhramsha. Apabhramsha continued in this capacity until the end of the Middle Indo-Aryan period. In its stereotyped form, it even persisted into the early phase of the New Indo-Aryan period (10th century).

Most of the extant literature in Apabhramsha is based on Jain mythology, legends, and ethics. Classic texts include the Paumacariu of Svayambhu (8th–9th century), a Jain version of the Ramayana; the Mahapurana of Pushpadanta (10th century), based on the lives of Jain legendary figures; the Bhavisattakaha of Dhanpala (10th century); and the Pasanahachariu of Padmakirti (11th century). Doha verses, in which each verse is complete in itself and embodies an independent concept, are also a favourite literary form in Apabhramsha.

The Gujarat king Hemachandra (12th century) treated Apabhramsha at length in his grammar of Prakrit. He is said to have based his observations on the western dialects. It is likely that these dialects pioneered Apabhramsha poetry, which then gradually spread to the southern and eastern parts of the Indo-Aryan language area.

As previously noted, Apabhramsha has a number of unique phonological and morphological characteristics. These features show a marked departure from the synthetic nature of the Old Indo-Aryan languages, which had still been lingering in the early phases of the Middle Indo-Aryan, and paved the way for the advent of the New Indo-Aryan languages.

Among these characteristics are that there is increased vocalic flexibility, in which one vowel may be substituted for another; the ending vowel of words that have declensional terminations may be shortened or lengthened; the pronunciation of /e/ and /o/ is shortened when compounded with a consonant; and the pronunciation of /um/, /ham/, /him/, and /hum/ is shortened when positioned at the end of a metrical foot (the type and number of feet determine the rhythm of a verse).

Sound changes also occur among the consonants. An /r/ can be optionally retained as the final member of a conjunct, and it is also sometimes substituted for the final (non-/-r/) member of a conjunct. Intervocalic consonants-those that are immediately preceded and followed by vowels-may change. For instance, /-k-/, /-kh-/, /-t-/, /-th-/, /-p-/, and /-ph-/ change, respectively, to /-g-/, /-gh-/, /-d-/, /-dh-/, /-b-/, and /-bh-/; /-m-/ changes to /-v-/; and /-mha-/ (from /-ksma-/ and /-sma-/) optionally changes to /-mbha-/.

Apabhramsha inflectional features include the merging of the a-, i-, and u-stems of feminine and neuter words (see gender). The a-stems express the nominative and accusative cases in an identical manner (taking /u/ in the singular and /a/ in the plural). In addition, the instrumental case merges with the locative case, and the ablative coincides with the dative/genitive.

Apabhramsha adds inflectional suffixes to words to avoid confusion between cases that are otherwise expressed identically. Examples include the use of /-tana/ to indicate ablative; /-tana/ or /-kera/ to indicate genitive; and /-majjha/ to indicate locative. In conjugation, Apabhramsha has developed additional terminations. In the present tense, for instance, the first person singular /-um/ becomes the plural /-hum/; the second person singular /-hi/ becomes the plural /-hu/; and the third person singular /-hi/ remains unchanged in the plural. Finally, while substitution of the past participle passive form for the finite verb in the past tense is quite frequent in the Prakrits, it has become almost a rule in Apabhramsha.archon,  in ancient Greece, the chief magistrate or magistrates in many city-states. The office became prominent in the Archaic period, when the kings (basileis) were being superseded by aristocrats.

At Athens the list of annual archons begins with 682 bc. By the middle of the 7th century bc, executive power was in the hands of nine archons, who shared the religious, military, and judicial functions once discharged by the king alone. The archon proper was the principal civil and judicial officer and may have presided over both Boule (Greek boulē, council) and Ecclesia (Greek ekklēsia, assembly); as eponymous archon, he gave his name to his year of office.

Next came the polemarch, commander in war and judge in litigation involving foreigners. Third, the kingship survived in the basileus, who, as chief religious officer, presided over the Areopagus (aristocratic council) when it sat as a homicide court. Lastly there were six thesmotetai ("determiners of custom"), who dealt with miscellaneous judicial problems.

The potential power of the archons placed them under a variety of restrictions. Before entering office they had to undergo an examination (dokimasia) by the Boule and the law courts of birth qualifications, physical fitness, treatment of parents, and military activity; at the end of their term, they underwent an examination (euthyna) of their conduct, especially financial, while in office. Membership was originally open only to nobles by birth (eupatrids or eupatridai), who served as archons for life. The term of office was eventually reduced to 10 years, then to a single year, after which, since they could not be reelected, the archons became life members of the Areopagus. The eupatrid monopoly was broken c. 594 bc, when Solon made the top or top two property classes eligible for office.

Under the Cleisthenic constitution (508–c. 487), archons were elected directly by the Ecclesia; later they were chosen by lot from 500 previously elected candidates. Until 457 the office was still restricted to the top two classes. Then eligibility was first extended to the third property class; finally the fourth class was admitted in fact, though theoretically ineligible.

In the 5th century the authority of the archons declined. The polemarch lost his army command to 10 tribal commanders (stratēgoi), who also replaced the archons in the administrative sphere. The archons thus became primarily judicial officers. By the mid-5th century they no longer gave their own judgments but merely conducted preliminary inquiries (anakrisis), then brought the case before a jury, presiding over the hearing, but with no responsibility for directing the jury on matters of law.

Archons were also found at Delphi, Plataea, Phocis, and eastern and western Locris. During the 5th century the institution spread widely in the Aegean islands, mainly under Athenian influence, and then in the Hellenistic period to Anatolia. armoire,  large two-door cupboard, usually movable and containing shelves, hanging space, and sometimes drawers. It was originally used for storing arms. The armoires designed by André-Charles Boulle, the cabinetmaker to Louis XIV in the late 17th century, are among the most sumptuous and imposing pieces of Western furniture.

The word, which sometimes denoted a cupboard set into the paneling of a room, was probably first used in the 16th century, when detailed carving based on Flemish design was characteristic of fine examples. In the following century geometric designs in high relief became more common; also, in the 17th century the name was extended to cover wardrobes and clothespresses.…another Ampex alumnus, founded the Atari Corporation. Bushnell asked Alcorn to design a simple game based on Ping-Pong, explaining by way of inspiration that Atari had received a contract to make it. While there was in fact no such contract, Alcorn was adept at television electronics and produced a simple…In the 1930s his Atelier 17 printmaking group was the centre of experimental intaglio work in Paris. In the 1940s he went to the United States and, through his teaching in New York, exercised a powerful influence on contemporary American printmaking. Other artists who did noteworthy graphic work in……other early reviews were the Athenaeum (1828–1921), an independent literary weekly, and the Spectator (founded 1828), a nonpartisan but conservative-leaning political weekly that nonetheless supported parliamentary reform and the cause of the North in the American Civil War. Later reviews included the Saturday Review (1855–1938), which had George Bernard Shaw…Athos,  fictional character, one of the swashbuckling heroes of The Three Musketeers by Alexandre Dumas père. The other two musketeers are his friends Porthos and Aramis, who join him in fighting various enemies during the reigns of the French kings Louis XIII and Louis XIV.John’s Audi filia ("Listen, Daughter"), a treatise on Christian perfection addressed to the nun Doña Sancha Carillo, is considered to be a masterwork. His classical spiritual letters were edited by J.M. de Buck (Lettres de direction) in 1927. His complete works (Obras completas del B. Mtro.……the cars stopping at urban automotive service stations located at intersections of two streets revealed that almost all came from four of the 16 possible routes through the intersection (four ways of entering times four ways of leaving). Examination of the percentage of cars in each route that stopped for…She then wrote and directed Away from Her (2006), her adaptation of Alice Munro’s short story "The Bear Went over the Mountain," for which she earned an Academy Award nomination for best adapted screenplay. Starring Gordon Pinsent and Julie Christie as a married couple coping with Alzheimer disease and a……of the Anzacs (2015), and Backroad Nation (2019)-also earned numerous honours and enthusiastic praise from critics, fans, and the music industry. In 2004 Kernaghan was awarded a Medal of the Order of Australia in recognition of his fund-raising efforts on behalf of farmers and rural communities.Bahāʾī Faith,  religion founded in Iraq in the mid-19th century by Mīrzā Ḥosayn ʿAlī Nūrī, who is known as Bahāʾ Allāh (also spelled Bahāʾullāh), which in Arabic means "Glory of God." The cornerstone of Bahāʾī belief is the conviction that Bahāʾ Allāh and his forerunner, who was known as the Bāb (Persian: "Gateway"), were manifestations of God, who in his essence is unknowable. The principal Bahāʾī tenets are the essential unity of all religions and the unity of humanity. Bahāʾīs believe that all the founders of the world’s great religions have been manifestations of God and agents of a progressive divine plan for the education of the human race. Despite their apparent differences, the world’s great religions, according to the Bahāʾīs, teach an identical truth. Bahāʾ Allāh’s peculiar function was to overcome the disunity of religions and establish a universal faith. Bahāʾīs believe in the oneness of humanity and devote themselves to the abolition of racial, class, and religious prejudices. The great bulk of Bahāʾī teachings is concerned with social ethics. The faith has no priesthood and does not observe ritual forms in its worship.

The Bahāʾī religion originally grew out of the Bābī faith, or sect, which was founded in 1844 by Mīrzā ʿAlī Moḥammad of Shīrāz in Iran. He proclaimed a spiritual doctrine emphasizing the forthcoming appearance of a new prophet or messenger of God who would overturn old beliefs and customs and usher in a new era. Though new, these beliefs originated in Twelver Shiʿi Islam, which asserts a belief in the forthcoming return of the 12th imam (successor of Muhammad), who will renew religion and guide the faithful. Mīrzā ʿAlī Moḥammad first proclaimed his beliefs in 1844 and assumed the title of the Bāb. Soon the Bāb’s teachings spread throughout Iran, provoking strong opposition from both the Shiʿi Muslim clergy and the government. The Bāb was arrested and, after several years of incarceration, was executed in 1850. Large-scale persecutions of his adherents, the Bābīs, followed.

One of the Bāb’s earliest disciples and strongest exponents was Mīrzā Ḥosayn ʿAlī Nūrī, who had assumed the name Bahāʾ Allāh when he renounced his social standing and joined the Bābīs. Bahāʾ Allāh was arrested in 1852 and jailed in Tehrān, where he became aware that he was the prophet and messenger of God whose coming had been predicted by the Bāb. He was released in 1853 and exiled to Baghdad, where his leadership revived the Bābī community. In 1863, shortly before being moved by the Ottoman government to Constantinople (now Istanbul), Bahāʾ Allāh declared to his fellow Bābīs that he was the messenger of God foretold by the Bāb. An overwhelming majority of Bābīs acknowledged his claim and thenceforth became known as Bahāʾīs. Bahāʾ Allāh was subsequently confined by the Ottomans in Adrianople (now Edirne, Turkey) and then in Acre in Palestine (now ʿAkko, Israel).

Before Bahāʾ Allāh died in 1892, he appointed his eldest son, ʿAbd al-Bahāʾ (1844–1921), to be the leader of the Bahāʾi community and the authorized interpreter of his teachings. ʿAbd al-Bahāʾ actively administered the movement’s affairs and spread the faith to North America, Europe, and other continents. He appointed his eldest grandson, Shoghi Effendi Rabbānī (1897–1957), his successor.

The Bahāʾi Faith underwent a rapid expansion beginning in the 1960s, and by the early 21st century it had more than 180 national spiritual assemblies (national governing bodies) and several thousand local spiritual assemblies. After Islamic fundamentalists came to power in Iran in 1979, the 300,000 Bahāʾīs there were persecuted by the government.

The writings and spoken words of the Bāb, Bahāʾ Allāh, and ʿAbd al-Bahāʾ form the sacred literature of the Bahāʾī Faith. Membership in the Bahāʾī community is open to all who profess faith in Bahāʾ Allāh and accept his teachings. There are no initiation ceremonies, no sacraments, and no clergy. Every Bahāʾī, however, is under the spiritual obligation to pray daily; to abstain totally from narcotics, alcohol, or any other substances that affect the mind; to practice monogamy; to obtain the consent of parents to marriage; and to attend the Nineteen Day Feast on the first day of each month of the Bahāʾī calendar. If capable, those between the ages of 15 and 70 are required to fast 19 days a year, going without food or drink from sunrise to sunset. The Nineteen Day Feast, originally instituted by the Bāb, brings together the Bahāʾīs of a given locality for prayer, the reading of scriptures, the discussion of community activities, and the enjoyment of one another’s company. The feasts are designed to ensure universal participation in the affairs of the community and the cultivation of the spirit of brotherhood and fellowship.

In the early 21st century there were nine Bahāʾī houses of worship: in Australia, Cambodia, Chile, Germany, India, Panama, Samoa, the United States, and Uganda. In the temples there is no preaching; services consist of recitation of the scriptures of all religions.

The Bahāʾīs use a calendar, established by the Bāb and confirmed by Bahāʾ Allāh, in which the year is divided into 19 months of 19 days each, with the addition of 4 intercalary days (5 in leap years). The year begins on the first day of spring, March 21, which is one of several holy days in the Bahāʾī calendar.

The Bahāʾī community is governed according to general principles proclaimed by Bahāʾ Allāh and through institutions created by him that were elaborated and expanded on by ʿAbd al-Bahāʾ. The governance of the Bahāʾī community begins on the local level with the election of a local spiritual assembly. The electoral process excludes parties or factions, nominations, and campaigning for office. The local spiritual assembly has jurisdiction over all local affairs of the Bahāʾī community. On the national scale, each year Bahāʾīs elect delegates to a national convention that elects a national spiritual assembly with jurisdiction over Bahāʾīs throughout an entire country. All national spiritual assemblies of the world periodically constitute themselves an international convention and elect a supreme governing body known as the Universal House of Justice. This body applies the laws promulgated by Bahāʾ Allāh and legislates on matters not covered in the sacred texts. The seat of the Universal House of Justice is in Haifa, Israel, in the immediate vicinity of the shrines of the Bāb and ʿAbd al-Bahāʾ and near the Shrine of Bahāʾ Allāh at Bahjī, near ʿAkko.

There also exist in the Bahāʾī Faith appointive institutions, such as the Hands of the Cause of God and the continental counselors. The members of the Hands of the Cause of God were appointed by Bahāʾ Allāh and Shoghi Effendi. The continental counselors are appointed by the Universal House of Justice. The primary functions of both groups are to propagate the Bahāʾī Faith and protect the community.The Banjiang Riot of 1797 was said to have been started by the Buyi people, and thousands of them were either burned to death or beheaded. The most important popular revolt against the central government was one led by Zhang Xiumei, a Miao, in 1855. He…Battles of Taraori,  (1191), series of engagements that opened all of north India to Muslim control. The battles were fought between Muʿizz al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Sām of Ghūr and Prithviraja III, the Chauhan (Chahamana) Rajput ruler of Ajmer and Delhi. The battlefield lay between Karnal, about 70 miles (110 km) north of Delhi, and Thanesar, in the Karnal region of the modern state of Haryana, India.

Muḥammad had taken Lahore from the last of the Ghaznavids in 1186 and wished to invade Hindu India. In 1191 he was defeated by a confederate Rajput host, led by Prithviraja and supported by Jai Chand of Kannauj and Banaras (now Varanasi). In 1192 he returned and defeated and killed Prithviraja, then unsupported by Jai Chand, on the same field. The Ghūrid cavalry tactics baffled the Rajputs until Muḥammad was able to crush the centre with his main force. This battle was decisive. Delhi was occupied in 1192–93, and the whole of north India fell into Muslim hands within 20 years.Before the Dawn,  historical novel by Shimazaki Tōson, published serially as Yoake mae in the journal Chūō koron ("Central Review") from 1929 to 1935 and printed in book form in 1935. It details the effects of Westernization on a rural Japanese community in the second half of the 19th century. Despite its stylistic simplicity and undeveloped characterizations, it is considered a modern masterpiece for its impressive scope.

The novel traces the life of Aoyama Hanzō from 1853 to 1886. Hanzō (who was based on Shimazaki’s father) eagerly welcomes the transfer of power from the military Tokugawa shogunate to the Meiji emperor. However, his idealism gives way to disillusionment as he is alienated by the old peasants and misled by the new bureaucrats. A tragic hero, he is convinced that the cause of pure patriotism has been betrayed by the modernizers; he dies alone and insane.bhava-cakra, (from Sanskrit: "wheel [cakra] of becoming [bhava]")  in Buddhism, a representation of the endless cycle of rebirths governed by the law of dependent origination (pratītya-samutpāda), shown as a wheel clutched by a monster, symbolizing impermanence.

In the centre of the wheel are shown the three basic evils, symbolized by a red dove (passion), a green snake (anger), and a black pig (ignorance). The intermediate space between the centre and the rim is divided by spokes into five (later, six) sections, depicting the possible states into which a person can be reborn: the realms of gods, titans (if six states are shown), people, animals, ghosts, and demons. Around the rim of the wheel the 12 nidānas, or interrelated phases in the cycle of existence, are shown in an allegorical, or symbolical, manner-ignorance, karman formations, rebirth consciousness, mind and body, sense organs, contact, sensation, craving, grasping, becoming, birth, and old age and death.…herself in the parody film Borat, in which Sacha Baron Cohen played a reporter from Kazakhstan who had seen Baywatch reruns and wanted to find and marry Anderson. In 2022 she performed as Roxie Hart in the Broadway production of Chicago.Bosch GmbH,  German company that is Europe’s largest auto-parts brand manufacturer and one of the world’s leading makers of auto ignition, fuel injection, and antilock braking systems. The company also produces industrial hydraulic and pneumatic equipment, telecommunications equipment and systems, power tools, household appliances, radios, television sets, and audio-visual equipment. Its headquarters are in Stuttgart, and it has subsidiaries throughout Europe, North and South America, Asia, and Australia.

Robert Bosch (q.v.) founded the company in 1886 to repair electrical equipment. Two inventions-Bosch’s magneto and his partner’s spark plug-became the basis for the company’s line of auto parts.

Bosch’s company began selling  auto parts to  the rapidly growing American automotive market  about 1900, and by 1914 two-thirds of the company’s sales were in the United States.  However,  the majority of its  American businesses  were expropriated by the U.S. government in 1918 during World War I.  Bosch’s  American operations  were  taken over again during World War II, but by the 1950s the company had resumed its sales to American and other foreign automotive makers and was expanding rapidly as the world’s consumer automotive market thrived in the postwar economic boom. In the 1950s Bosch also began diversifying into such areas as the manufacture of household appliances, power tools, and hydraulic equipment. The advanced fuel-injection systems developed by Bosch engineers from 1949 were widely adopted by automakers in the 1970s and ’80s because they reduced fuel consumption and minimized exhaust pollution. The antilock braking systems pioneered by Bosch also came into wide use on European and American cars during the 1980s and ’90s.

In the early 1990s,  the company met a decline in revenues by large layoffs, but it subsequently regained its financial health.  The company, whose stock was publicly held between 1917 and 1937, is now primarily  owned by the Robert Bosch Foundation.Boston University,  private, coeducational institution of higher learning in Boston, Massachusetts, U.S. The university is composed of 15 schools and colleges. Professional degrees are awarded at the School of Law, the School of Medicine, the Goldman School of Dental Medicine, and the School of Management. A range of graduate degree programs are available in education, engineering, and the arts and sciences. The university operates internship programs in cities around the world, including Washington, D.C., London, Moscow, Peking (Beijing), Madrid, Paris, and Sydney, Australia, and also has study-abroad opportunities in Europe, Israel, Central and South America, and Africa. The Center for Computational Science is home to the SGI/Cray Origin2000, a parallel supercomputer. Mugar Memorial Library and its branches house about 1.9 million volumes; its archives include the papers of Franz Liszt, Theodore Roosevelt, and Robert Frost. Total enrollment is about 30,000.

Boston University began as a Methodist theological school in Vermont in 1839. The school moved to Boston in 1867. The university was one of the first American institutions of higher education to accept African-American and international students and the first in the state to award degrees to women; Helen Magill White became the first American woman to receive a Ph.D. when she graduated from Boston University. Noteworthy alumni include Martin Luther King, Jr., Franz Kline, Barbara Jordan, Edward Brooke, Anna Howard Shaw, and David Hemery.Bran Castle,  medieval stronghold in the Transylvanian Alps (Southern Carpathian Mountains) of Brașov county, central Romania. Popularly-if inaccurately-identified with the fictional Castle Dracula, Bran Castle is one of Romania’s top tourist attractions.

The first known fortress near Bran Pass (now called Rucăr-Bran Pass), a trade route across the Carpathian Mountains, was erected after 1211 by knights of the Teutonic Order but was held only briefly. In 1377 King Louis I of Hungary authorized the Transylvanian Saxons of the Brașov region to build a castle as a bulwark against northward expansion of the Ottoman Empire. The castle was completed by 1388; it also served as a customs house for Transylvania, then a voivodate (province) of Hungary. In the early 15th century, King Sigismund of Hungary temporarily handed over possession of the castle to Prince Mircea the Old of Walachia, an adjoining territory that was being menaced by the Ottoman Turks. In 1441 János Hunyadi, voivode (governor) of Transylvania, defeated an Ottoman army at the castle.

In 1498 the Transylvanian Saxons of Brașov bought the castle from King Vladislas II of Bohemia and Hungary, and they continued to hold it even after the conquest of the Hungarian capital by the Ottoman sultan Süleyman the Magnificent in 1541. During the 1620s the Transylvanian prince Gábor Bethlen made extensive modifications and fortifications. The house of Habsburg gained control of the region in 1687, but the castle remained in Transylvanian hands, as confirmed by the Diploma Leopoldinum, a decree issued in 1690. Under local control, the castle was restored several times for service as a fortress, most recently in the 1880s, but it fell into disrepair thereafter.

In 1920 the city of Brașov turned Bran Castle over to Queen Marie of Greater Romania, who restored the castle as a royal summer residence and lived there both before and after the death, in 1927, of her husband, King Ferdinand I. She also built the castle’s principal modern outbuilding, the Tea House, which later became a restaurant. Marie died in 1938, and her daughter, Princess Ileana, was forced out of the country by the new communist regime in 1948. The communists opened the castle to the public as a museum in 1956. Ileana died in 1991, and the postcommunist Romanian government handed over the castle to her son, Archduke Dominic of Habsburg, in 2009. The castle continued to operate as a museum.

Bran Castle is often associated with the fictional vampire Count Dracula. The Romanian castle resembles Castle Dracula, as described in Bram Stoker’s novel Dracula (1897), in that both stand on rocky precipices and command spectacular views. But Stoker, an Irish writer, is not known to have ever visited Transylvania. Moreover, Vlad the Impaler (Vlad III Dracula), the historical personage most closely identified with Stoker’s Dracula, never ruled Bran Castle, although some sources claim that he was held prisoner there for two months. Vlad, grandson of Mircea the Old, was a 15th-century voivode of Walachia.Brigadier Gerard,   (foaled 1968), English racehorse (Thoroughbred) who won all but one of his 18 races in his three-year racing career, winning more than $581,000. He was sired by Queen’s Hussar and foaled by La Paiva. John Hislop bred him, his wife owned him, and Major Dick Hern trained him at West Ilsley in Berkshire. In 1970 he entered four races and won them all. The following year he was again unbeaten, this time in six races, most notably the Two Thousand Guineas. In 1972, his last year of racing, he came in first in seven contests, losing only to the American-bred Roberto. Retired from racing after the 1972 season, Brigadier Gerard was sent to stud.…25,000 are represented by the British Darts Organisation (BDO; founded 1973). The BDO is the founder member of the World Darts Federation (WDF), which represents more than 500,000 darts players in 50 countries. The major championships are the Winmau World Masters, the WDF World Cup, and the Embassy World Professional……adapted into a critically acclaimed film (2015) with a screenplay by Nick Hornby. Among Tóibín’s later novels are The Testament of Mary (2012), which was short-listed for the Man Booker Prize and adapted for the stage, and Nora Webster (2014). House of Names (2017) centres on  Clytemnestra of Greek mythology.…Sua are associated with the Budu (Babudu) on the western edge of the Ituri, near Wamba; and the Aka, of whom few remain, are found with the Mangbetu in the northwest. The Efe have the broadest distribution, extending across the northern and eastern portions of the Ituri, and are associated…Bund,  Jewish socialist political movement founded in Vilnius in 1897 by a small group of workers and intellectuals from the Jewish Pale of tsarist Russia. The Bund called for the abolition of discrimination against Jews and the reconstitution of Russia along federal lines. At the time of the founding of the Russian Social-Democratic Workers’ Party (1898), the Bund was the most effective socialist organization in the country. Its determination to be the sole representative of Jewish workers conflicted with Lenin’s plans for a centralized party. In 1903 the Jewish leaders walked out of the second Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Party. After rejoining the Social Democrats in 1906, they generally supported the Mensheviks. In April 1920 the Bund divided into two groups: the majority merged with the Communist Party while the minority, led by Rafael Abramovich, maintained its separate identity until suppressed by the Bolshevik government. The Bund was active in Poland between World War I and World War II.In "By the Road to the Contagious Hospital," the poet observes fragile signs of spring emerging from a blighted landscape, and the subject of awakening life recurs in many of the remaining 26 poems. Despite the harsh social criticism of "The Crowd at the Ball Game"……11th-century compilation known as the Cambridge Songs. The blend of humorous contes, hymnody, and lyric testifies to a diverse taste in the unknown anthologist. Other lyric collections from the next century, such as the Ripoll and Arundel lyrics, may draw upon work of earlier provenance. To the chance survival of……a manuscript of the ballad Candāmyana by Mullā Dāūd (c. first half of the 16th century; Prince of Wales Museum of Western India, Mumbai). The early 16th century thus appears to have been a period of inventiveness and set the stage for the development of the Mughal and Rājput schools,……wife, Jean Case, created the Case Foundation, a charitable investment organization. In 2006 the foundation joined various public- and private-sector organizations in a \$60 million partnership with the U.S. government to bring clean water to up to 10 million people in 10 countries in sub-Saharan Africa by 2010. The initiative,……Traité de mécanique céleste (Celestial Mechanics), appearing in five volumes between 1798 and 1827, summarized the results obtained by his mathematical development and application of the law of gravitation. He offered a complete mechanical interpretation of the solar system by devising methods for calculating the motions of the planets…Celtic,  Scottish professional football (soccer) team based in Glasgow. Nicknamed "the Bhoys," (the h is said to have been added to phonetically represent an Irish pronunciation of the word boys) Celtic shares a fierce rivalry with the crosstown Rangers, which is often of a sectarian nature, with Celtic and its supporters seen as the Catholic team and Rangers as the Protestant side. Together, the two teams have long dominated Scottish domestic football.

Celtic was founded in 1887 at a meeting in St. Mary’s Church hall in the Calton district of Glasgow. The club played its first match, against Rangers, the following year, winning 5–2. Celtic moved to its longtime home, Celtic Park (also known as Parkhead), in 1892. Renovated in 1995, the stadium now accommodates more than 60,000 spectators. Celtic began playing in white shirts with green collars, and the club’s famous uniform of a green-and-white striped shirt with white shorts debuted in 1903.

Celtic won its first league championship in the 1892–93 season and has won 50 in total. The club has also won the Scottish League Cup 16 times and the Scottish Cup 37 times. Celtic went through a lean run of 11 seasons without a league championship before the arrival of Jock Stein as manager in 1965, but the team went on to win nine Scottish league championships in a row from 1965–66 to 1973–74.

The club has also had a number of notable accomplishments outside of domestic play. In 1967 Celtic became the first British club to win the prestigious European Cup (now the Champions League), defeating Inter Milan 2–1 in Portugal. That Celtic team-which featured star players such as Billy McNeill, Bobby Lennox, and Jimmy Johnstone-is remembered as "The Lisbon Lions." Celtic almost repeated the feat three years later when it was the runner-up in the 1970 European Cup final. Wim Jansen, a player on the Dutch team Feyenoord that beat Celtic on that occasion, in 1997 became the club’s first manager from outside of Britain or Ireland. Six years later Celtic reached the 2003 Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) Cup final but lost to FC Porto.Changamire Dynasty,   dynasty that ruled a vast area in central Africa between the Zambezi and Limpopo rivers (now in Zimbabwe). The dynasty was the greatest power in central Africa from the 15th century until its destruction about 1830; it succeeded even in driving the Portuguese out of the interior of Africa.

Its founder, Changamir, was a lowly son of Matope, the ruler of the Mbire (or Monomotapa) empire, who appointed him governor of its central and southern provinces. He declared his independence of Matope’s successor and founded a kingdom that he called Rozwi. He established trade contacts with Arab traders, and his son (Changamire II, who used the name as a dynastic title) established contacts with the Portuguese settlements on the east African coast (c. 1500).

Although contacts with the Portuguese were initially encouraged, from 1693 to 1695 the Changamire empire drove the Portuguese from all their stations in the interior during a campaign against the remainder of the Mbire empire. Changamire’s empire was destroyed by the coming of the Ngoni and Ndebele tribes during the Mfecane (a period of vast migrations occasioned by Zulu wars in South Africa).…"The Song of Akli") and Chants d’histoire et de vie pour des roses de sable: texte bilingue pour un peuple sahrawi (1978; "Songs of History and Life for the Sand Roses"). The latter, written in Spanish and French, is a celebration of the struggle of the Saharoui people against the……conducive to our good (Characteristiks of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, 1711). Taste is a kind of balanced discernment, whereby a person recognizes that which is congenial to his sentiments and therefore an object of pleasurable contemplation. Following Locke, Shaftesbury laid much emphasis on the association of ideas as a…Charaka-samhita,  comprehensive text on ancient Indian medicine credited to Charaka, who was a practitioner of the traditional system of Indian medicine known as Ayurveda. Charaka is thought to have flourished sometime between the 2nd century bce and the 2nd century ce.

The Charaka-samhita as it exists today is thought to have arisen in the 1st century ce. Studies on ancient Indian medicine indicate, however, that the original text was written several centuries earlier by Agnivesha, who was one of six disciples of Ayurvedic scholar Punarvasu Atreya (the other five disciples were Bhela, Jatukarna, Parashara, Harita, and Ksharapani). Each of the disciples went on to compose samhitas, incorporating ideas from Atreya’s school of thought as well as their own understanding of the subject. Of those, the Agnivesha-samhita, composed by Agnivesha, was unique in depth and content. Later refined and annotated by Charaka, it came to be known as the Charaka-samhita. Charaka divided the treatise into eight parts, or ashtanga sthanas: sutra, nidana, vimana, sarira, endriya, chikitsa, kalpa, and siddha; each part contained multiple chapters.

While Charaka delved into all aspects of medicine, including the logic and philosophy behind the Indian medicinal system, he placed special emphasis on the diagnosis of disease and treated Ayurveda as a comprehensive system of health care that dealt with both preventive and curative aspects. He also dealt elaborately with subjects such as fetal generation and development, anatomy of the human body, and function and malfunction of the body according to the tridosha (the three humours of the body)-vata, pitta, and kapha. He also discussed the classification of various diseases.Chicago Cubs,  American professional baseball team that plays its home games at Chicago’s Wrigley Field. Despite limited success, the Cubs have one of the most loyal fan bases and are among the most popular franchises in baseball. The Cubs play in the National League (NL) and have won three World Series titles (1907, 1908, and 2016).

The team, originally known as the Chicago White Stockings, was a charter member of the NL in 1876 and had quick success. Led by Cap Anson, the team won 6 of the NL’s first 11 championships. Before adopting the name Cubs in the 1903 (the Cubs name was first associated with the team the previous year), the team was known by a variety of names, including the Colts and the Orphans. The Cubs’ best season came in 1906, when they won 116 games and posted a .763 winning percentage, although they lost to the crosstown rival Chicago White Sox in the World Series. However, the 1907 and 1908 World Series titles were captured by the Cubs-the first team to win consecutive World Series.

In 1916 the Cubs moved into Weeghman Park (opened 1914), which in 1926 was renamed Wrigley Field and is today the second oldest baseball stadium still in use (Boston’s Fenway Park opened in 1912). During the 1910s and ’20s the team enjoyed limited success, winning NL titles in 1910 and 1918. From 1929 to 1938 the Cubs dominated the NL, winning four pennants (1929, 1932, 1935, and 1938) behind the strong play of centre fielder Hack Wilson, catcher Gabby Hartnett, and second baseman Rogers Hornsby. The 1932 World Series produced one of baseball’s legendary moments-Babe Ruth’s "called shot," when the New York Yankees slugger allegedly pointed to centre field and promptly hit a home run to that very spot.

After the 1938 season the Cubs had only one winning year until 1945, when they won the NL pennant. That year’s World Series launched what has become known as the "Curse of the Billy Goat" (versions of the story vary). In the fourth game of the World Series, tavern owner Billy Sianis was forced to leave Wrigley Field after showing up with his goat, and upon his ejection Sianis cursed the franchise. The Cubs would not return to the World Series for more than 70 years.

Post-1945 Cubs history is distinguished primarily by disappointment on an epic scale. In 1969 the Cubs were first in their division (then the NL Eastern Division) throughout most of the season, leading it by as many as eight and a half games in mid-August before collapsing at the end of the season and falling to eight games behind the New York Mets, who went on to win the World Series. In 1984 the Cubs looked set to break their World Series drought, but, with the Cubs leading in the fifth and decisive game of the National League Championship Series (NLCS) against the San Diego Padres, a ground ball went through first baseman Leon Durham’s legs, helping the Padres defeat the Cubs. In 2003 the Cubs again appeared to be headed for a World Series, leading three games to two over the Florida Marlins in the NLCS. Five outs away from making it to the World Series, the Cubs missed the chance at another out when fan interference blocked an attempted catch by outfielder Moises Alou of a pop foul near the stands (the so-called Bartman incident). The Cubs ended up losing the game-and the series.

Despite these disappointments, in 2008 the Cubs became only the second team in Major League Baseball history to record 10,000 wins. Led by manager Lou Piniella, first baseman Derrek Lee, third baseman Aramis Ramírez, outfielder Alfonso Soriano, catcher Geovany Soto (who won Rookie of the Year honours in 2008), and pitchers Ryan Dempster, Carlos Zambrano, and Ted Lilly, in 2007 and 2008 the Cubs won consecutive NL Central Division titles-the first time in 100 years that the team qualified for the playoffs in consecutive seasons. In 2009 the Cubs had a winning season but missed out on the playoffs, and, beginning with the following season, they entered into a prolonged losing period.

In 2011 the team brought in general manager Theo Epstein, who had put together the Boston Red Sox team that ended that franchise’s 86-year title drought in 2004. Epstein filled the Cubs roster with young talent, notably third baseman Kris Bryant and first baseman Anthony Rizzo, and in 2015 the team made an unexpected run to the postseason, where the Cubs lost the NLCS to the Mets. The following year the team won 103 games-the club’s highest win total in over a century-and handily won a division title. In the postseason the Cubs rallied to win the NLCS and clinch the club’s first berth in the World Series since 1945. There the Cubs rallied from a 3–1 series deficit to the Cleveland Indians, winning three straight games to capture the franchise’s first world championship in 108 years. In 2017 the Cubs advanced to a third straight NLCS for the first time in franchise history, where the team was eliminated by the Los Angeles Dodgers. Chicago advanced to a franchise-record fourth straight playoff appearance in 2018, but the team’s time in the postseason lasted just one day, ending in a loss in the Wild Card Game. The Cubs further regressed in 2019, winning just 84 games and missing the playoffs after a late-season collapse that saw the team lose five consecutive one-run games in the final weeks of the season. In the 2020 season, which was shortened because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Cubs returned to the playoffs but lost in the Wild Card round. During the off-season Epstein left the organization. Although Chicago got off to a strong start in 2021, a lengthy losing streak effectively ended the team’s hopes of qualifying for the postseason, and the Cubs traded a number of prominent players, including Rizzo and Bryant.

The Cubs franchise has produced numerous Hall of Famers, including the double-play combination of shortstop Joe Tinker (1902–12, 1916), second baseman Johnny Evers (1902–13), and first baseman Frank Chance (1898–1912). Other notable Hall of Famers are infielder Ernie Banks ("Mr. Cub"), who spent his entire career (1953–71) with the team, hitting 512 home runs; outfielder Billy Williams (1959–74); second baseman Ryne Sandberg (1982–94, 1996–97); pitcher Ferguson ("Fergie") Jenkins (1966–73, 1982–83); and third baseman Ron Santo (1960–73).

One of the most-hallowed traditions at Wrigley Field home games is the seventh-inning stretch. Famed sports broadcaster Harry Caray led the singing of "Take Me Out to the Ballgame" from 1982 until 1997 (he died in February 1998); guest "conductors" now lead the crowd.Chicago, Rock Island, and Pacific Railroad Company,  U.S. railroad company founded in 1847 as the Rock Island and La Salle Railroad Company to build a line from Rock Island to La Salle, Ill. By 1866 its lines extended from Chicago to Council Bluffs, Iowa.

Management in the late 19th century was extremely conservative, but new interests took over in 1901. By 1907 the line attained its peak length of 14,270 miles (22,975 kilometres) in 13 states, but this rapid expansion impaired its credit and it was reorganized in 1917 and again in 1947.

In the 1960s the Rock Island again began to decline. Merger discussions with other railroads failed, and it began bankruptcy proceedings in March 1975. Federal loan guarantees kept it running, but in January 1980 a federal judge ordered the railroad liquidated on the grounds that there was no way of reorganizing it for profitable operation. Its properties were sold off piecemeal in the early 1980s.…mines to the Chinese-government-owned corporation CITIC Ltd. (formerly CITIC Pacific). The deal, which was initially worth nearly \$3 billion (Australian), included future royalties on any ore produced. Mineralogy further acquired coal mines in 2008 and a nickel and cobalt refinery in 2009. Critics alleged that Palmer’s mines contained only low-grade…Chingachgook,  fictional character, a Mohican chief in four of the novels by James Fenimore Cooper known under the collective title The Leatherstocking Tales-comprising The Pioneers (1823), The Last of the Mohicans (1826), The Pathfinder (1840), and The Deerslayer (1841).

Chingachgook is a lifelong friend of Natty Bumppo, the white frontiersman and hero of the saga. Chingachgook and his son Uncas (who is the last of the Mohicans) frequently help defend the English settlers against hostile attacks by other native tribes and the French. Uncas is eventually killed by a Huron warrior. As an old man, Chingachgook rejects the Moravian faith that he had embraced in his youth, and he dies wearing traditional Mohican regalia.…Latin chronicles, Chronicon majus and Chronicon minus, are reasonably trustworthy sources because he was close to political events, harboured prominent persons at his abbey, and had a critical historical view. He drew upon eyewitness testimony and was critical of reported miracles.…and the group known as Chungnim Kohoe ("Eminent Assembly in the Bamboo Grove"), which was established by O Se-Jae, Yi Il-Lo, Yi Kyu-Bo, and others. This group was integral to the emergence and proliferation of literary criticism during this period.  Yi Il-Lo, in his P’ahan chip (1260; "Jottings to Break……a contrast between the conventional Claudio and Hero, who have the usual expectations of each other, and Beatrice and Benedick, who are highly skeptical of romance and courtship and, seemingly, each other. Claudio is deceived by the jealous Don John into believing that Hero is prepared to abandon him for…In each district the collector, who is also the district magistrate, is the principal representative of the administration. The collector functions in close cooperation with the superintendent of police to maintain law and order in the district and serves as the principal revenue officer. For administrative purposes, each district…Comitia Centuriata,  Ancient Roman military assembly, instituted c. 450 bc. It decided on war and peace, passed laws, elected consuls, praetors, and censors, and considered appeals of capital convictions. Unlike the older patrician Comitia Curiata, it included plebeians as well as patricians, assigned to classes and centuriae (centuries, or groups of 100) by wealth and the equipment they could provide for military duty. Voting started with the wealthier centuries, whose votes outweighed those of the poorer.…a substitute doctrine known as comparative negligence. Under this, each party is held responsible for a portion of the loss corresponding to the degree of blame attached to that party; a person who is judged to be 20 percent to blame for an accident may be required to pay 20…Confederation of Bar,  league of Polish nobles and gentry that was formed to defend the liberties of the nobility within the Roman Catholic Church and the independence of Poland from Russian encroachment. Its activities precipitated a civil war, foreign intervention, and the First Partition of Poland.

In February 1768, Russia had compelled the Polish Sejm (legislature) to abandon projects for internal reform, to grant full political rights to religious dissenters (i.e., members of the Protestant and Orthodox faiths), and to make Poland a Russian protectorate. In reaction, Adam Krasiński, the bishop of Kamieniec, Józef Pułaski, and Michał Krasiński organized a confederation at the little fortress of Bar in Podolia (Feb. 29, 1768) to oppose both the Polish king Stanisław II August Poniatowski and Russia.

Forced by the king’s army to abandon Bar, the confederates were generally checked in Poland’s southeastern provinces (summer 1768) by Russian troops, who had been occupying Warsaw during the Sejm’s session. Nevertheless, uprisings occurred in support of the confederation in all of Poland’s major cities; and under the military leadership of Ignacy Malczewski, Prince Karol Radziwiłł, and Kazimierz Pułaski, the confederates spread their rebellion throughout the country and gained the support of the Turks (who declared war on Russia on Oct. 8, 1768) and of the French (who sent advisers and some troops to the confederates). The confederates proclaimed the dethronement of Stanisław (Oct. 22, 1770) and refused to surrender to the Russians, whose continued military victories culminated in General Aleksandr Vasilyevich Suvorov’s triumph over the confederate army near Lanckorona (May 1771).

Although the Confederation of Bar stubbornly pursued its struggle until its last contingent was defeated at Częstochowa (Aug. 18, 1772), it failed to overthrow Stanisław or to end Russian domination over Polish affairs. Furthermore, its campaigns so devastated the country and weakened the government that Poland was defenseless when Prussia, and eventually Austria, agreed (Feb. 17 and Aug. 5, 1772) to partition Poland, which was compelled to cede almost one-third of its territory to the three partitioning powers.Conservative Baptist Association of America,  association of independent, autonomous Baptist churches in the United States, organized May 17, 1947, in Atlantic City, New Jersey. The founders originally organized the Fundamentalist Fellowship in 1920 but remained within the American (then Northern) Baptist Convention. Disputes over interpretation of scripture and theology, as well as fundamentalist objections to sending liberal missionaries to foreign countries, caused the Fellowship to separate from the Convention and set up the Conservative Baptist Association. It does not consider itself a denomination, although it functions essentially as one.

In 1992 the group reported 200,000 members and 1,084 congregations. Headquarters are in Wheaton, Illinois.legislation is the 1983 Convention on Cultural Property Implementation Act (CCPIA, or CPIA), which allows the U.S. government to respond to requests from other states party to the UNESCO convention to impose import restrictions on certain classes of archaeological or ethnographic material. Import restrictions apply even if material is……modern newsletters were the "corantos"-single-page collections of news items from foreign journals. They were circulated by the Dutch early in the 17th century, and English and French translations were published in Amsterdam. In the English American colonies, the Boston News-letter-credited also as the first American newspaper-appeared in 1704.…by three men-the seneschal, the count of the palace, and, foremost, the mayor of the palace, who also presided over the king’s estates. They traveled with the king, who, while having various privileged places of residence, did not live at a fixed capital. Only under Charlemagne did this pattern begin…coureur de bois, (French: "wood runner")  French Canadian fur trader of the late 17th and early 18th centuries. Most of the coureurs de bois traded illicitly (i.e., without the license required by the Quebec government). They sold brandy to First Nations peoples, which created difficulties for the nations with whom they traded. Though they defied the colonial authorities, they ultimately benefited them by exploring the frontier, developing the fur trade, and helping ally the First Nations with the French and against the English (see French and Indian War).…hand-rolled and prepared in a couscousière, a large covered pot with a lower compartment in which a stew or broth cooks and an upper portion with a pierced bottom in which the couscous steams. The grains would be sprinkled with liquid, stirred to separate the clumps, and steamed several times.…crisis management,  in government, the processes, strategies, and techniques used to prevent, mitigate, and terminate crises.

Public authorities face a variety of crises, such as natural disasters and environmental threats, financial meltdowns and terrorist attacks, epidemics and explosions, and information and communication technology (ICT) failures. Crises are not routine events (such as fires or traffic accidents). Crises are inconceivable events that often take politicians, citizens, and reporters by complete surprise. Crises occur when a community of people-an organization, a town, or a nation-perceives an urgent threat to core values or life-sustaining functions that must be urgently dealt with under conditions of deep uncertainty.

These dramatic events create tough challenges for public authorities and their organizations. Critical decisions must be made and implemented under considerable time pressure and in the absence of essential information about causes and consequences. Even if the conditions for effective action are severely impeded, citizens expect governmental leaders and public authorities to safeguard them from the threat at hand.

Two factors make it increasingly hard for these organizations and their leaders to meet this expectation. First, the qualities that increase welfare and drive progress in modern societies make these societies vulnerable to crises. Second, citizens and politicians alike have become at once more fearful and less tolerant of major hazards to public health, safety, and prosperity. The combination of these factors explains why relatively small disturbances can rapidly develop into deep crises and why the effects of crisis management are inherently limited.

Modern society has become increasingly complex and integrated. Complexity makes it hard to fully understand the manifold activities and processes that take place. As a result, emerging vulnerabilities can long go unrecognized; attempts to deal with them often produce unintended consequences (fueling rather than dampening the crisis). Tight coupling between a system’s component parts and with those of other systems facilitates the rapid proliferation of disturbances. Crises may, thus, have their roots far away (in a geographical sense) but rapidly snowball through the global networks, jumping from one system to another, gathering destructive potential along the way.

All this makes it hard to recognize a crisis before its consequences materialize. When a crisis begins to unfold, policy makers often do not see anything out of the ordinary. Everything is still in place, even though hidden interactions eat away at the pillars of the system. It is only when the crisis is in full swing and becomes manifest that policy makers can recognize it for what it is. Once a crisis has escalated into view, authorities can only try to minimize its consequences.

The contested nature of a crisis further complicates the situation. A crisis rarely, if ever, "speaks for itself." The definition of a situation is subjective; one person’s crisis is another person’s opportunity. For public authorities, this spells trouble: many seemingly innocent events can be transformed into crises. Western citizens have grown impatient with imperfections. They have come to fear glitches and have learned to see more of what they fear. In this culture of fear-sometimes referred to as the "risk society"-the modern mass media plays an amplifying role.

Even if consensus would exist that a serious threat is emerging, the status of this new problem is far from assured. Governments deal with urgent problems every day; attention for one problem takes away attention from another. For a threat to be recognized as a crisis, it must clear firmly entrenched hurdles.

Crisis management has two dimensions. The technical dimension pertains to the coping capacity of governmental institutions and public policies in the face of emerging threats. But there is also a political dimension: crisis management is a deeply controversial and intensely political activity. A combination of these dimensions translates into five critical challenges of crisis management: sense making, decision making, meaning making, terminating, and learning.

A crisis seems to pose a straightforward challenge: once a crisis becomes manifest, crisis managers must take measures to deal with its consequences. However, reality is much more complex. Most crises do not materialize with a big bang; they are the product of escalation. Policy makers must recognize from vague, ambivalent, and contradictory signals that something out of the ordinary is developing. They must appraise the threat and decide what the crisis is about.

Crisis managers often have a hard time meeting this challenge. The bewildering pace, ambiguity, and complexity of a crisis can easily overwhelm normal modes of situation assessment. Stress and organizational problems may further impair the ability to recognize and make sense of a crisis.

Some categories of people are known for their ability to remain cool and to stay clear-headed under pressure. They have developed a mode of information processing that enables competent performance under crisis conditions. Veteran military officers, journalists, and fire and police commanders are known for this. Some organizations have developed a proactive culture of "looking for problems" in their environment. These organizations have somehow developed a capacity for thorough yet fast-paced information processing under stressful conditions. The unresolved question is whether organizations can design these features into existing organizational cultures. 

Critical, or analytical, bibliography began early in the 20th century when scholars developed techniques to study the physical features of books. They were first successful at dating, identifying, and authenticating the earliest printed books, known as incunabula, which date from the second half… 
Crying is basic to infants from birth, and the cooing sounds they have begun making by about eight weeks progress to babbling and ultimately become part of meaningful speech. Virtually all infants begin to comprehend some words several months before they themselves speak their first…In the play Cymbeline, the king of Britain, decides that his daughter, Imogen, must marry his horrid stepson Cloten. When Cymbeline learns that Imogen is secretly married to Posthumus, he banishes Posthumus, who heads for Rome. In a conversation with a villainous Italian, Iachimo, Posthumus finds himself drawn……first book of short fiction, Darkness (1985), many of the stories, including the acclaimed "The World According to Hsü," are not only indictments of Canadian racism and traditional Indian views of women but also sharp studies of the edgy inner lives of her characters. The Middleman, and Other Stories (1988)…" 

Further processed poultry products leave the backs, necks, and bones available for their own processing. These materials are run through a machine called a mechanical deboner or a meat-bone separator. In general, the crushed meat and bones are continuously pressed against a… 
demotic script,  Egyptian hieroglyphic writing of cursive form that was used in handwritten texts from the early 7th century bce until the 5th century ce. Demotic script derived from the earlier pictographic hieroglyphic inscriptions and the cursive hieratic script, and it began to replace hieratic writing during the reign of Psamtik I (664–610 bce). By the 5th century bce, demotic script-which the Egyptians called sekh shat, meaning "writing for documents"-had come into use everywhere in Egypt for business and literary purposes, although hieratic remained in use for religious texts. The demotic script began to be displaced by Greek during the Ptolemaic period (304–30 bce), but hieratic graffiti left by the priests of Isis at Philae date from as late as 452 ce.

The term demotic is also used for the everyday form of any language that has developed alternative ("high" versus "low") levels of expression, such as in Greek and Arabic.…Free Press and the daily Detroit News, owned by the Gannett newspaper chain, resulted in heavy financial losses by both newspapers and threatened to collapse the Free Press. In 1989, following the approval of the U.S. attorney general, the papers’ advertising, business, production, and circulation departments were combined under a…Diplomatic, or immediate, compellence involves verbal threats and promises. Shows of force also assist this kind of coercion; realist scholars note that most diplomacy is underwritten by the unspoken possibility of military action. Demonstrative compellence involves a limited use of force coupled with the threat…
doctor of the church,  in Roman Catholicism, any of the 36 saints whose doctrinal writings have special authority. The writings and teachings of the various doctors of the church are of particular importance to Roman Catholic theology, and their works are considered to be both true and timeless. Although the title is not used in the same way in Eastern Orthodoxy, the Orthodox church esteems the 17 doctors of the church who died before the East-West Schism of 1045, and Saints John Chrysostom, Basil the Great, and Gregory of Nazianzus are especially honoured as the Three Holy Hierarchs.

In early Christianity the Western church recognized four doctors of the church-Ambrose, Augustine, Gregory the Great, and Jerome-and later adopted the Three Holy Hierarchs of the Eastern church and also Athanasius the Great. Since the 16th century dozens more have been given the term doctor by formal proclamation of the Roman Catholic Church, among them Saints Thomas Aquinas (1567), Bonaventure (1588), Anselm (1720), Leo I (1754), Bernard (1830), Francis of Sales (1877), the Venerable Bede (1899), Albertus Magnus (1931), Anthony of Padua (1946), Teresa of Ávila (1970), Catherine of Siena (1970), Thérèse of Lisieux (1997), and Hildegard (2012). For a complete list of the 36 doctors of the church, see list of doctors of the church.Driving ability is seriously impaired when the alcohol concentration in the blood exceeds 80 mg per 100 ml.
…founding partner in the organization Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative (DNDi), which works to create medicines for diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS. The group has played an important role in caring for the victims of disease outbreaks.duke,  Click Here to see full-size tablea European title of nobility, having ordinarily the highest rank below a prince or king (except in countries having such titles as archduke or grand duke). It is one of the five ranks of British nobility and peerage, which, in descending order, are duke, marquess, earl, viscount, and baron.

The title of dux, given by the Romans to high military commanders with territorial responsibilities, was assumed by the barbarian invaders of the Roman Empire and was used in their kingdoms and also in France and Germany for rulers of very large areas. The early Carolingian sovereigns in France and in Germany continued to appoint dukes, but their weaker successors found themselves increasingly constrained to free the dukes from royal control in the areas that they had to defend.

Franconia, Swabia, Bavaria, and Saxony, originally the homes of distinct tribes, emerged as the great "stemduchies" of Germany when the dukes appointed by the Carolingians as military governors made themselves increasingly independent.

In the 12th century the Hohenstaufen emperors, who created the new duchies of Austria (1156) and Styria (1180), seemed likely to succeed in reducing the dukes to genuinely obedient vassalage. At the same time, the lesser noble families began to consolidate their own holdings and jurisdiction at the expense of the ducal authority. The growth of these smaller territorial principalities (countships, etc.) naturally diminished the real prestige of the dukes. Despite the collapse of the Hohenstaufen design after 1250 and the success of the dukes in securing their independence in their own principalities, their title came no longer to denote greater power under the king but to signify only a higher rank than that of the princely counts. Furthermore, with the extensive privileges accorded the electors (only one of whom was a duke) by the Golden Bull of 1356, the duke had ceased even in theory to be the highest-ranking of the princes of the empire; the Austrian dukes indeed assumed the new title of archduke, claiming equal rights with electors.

From the 16th to the 19th century, lords of even comparatively small territories were granted or took the ducal title. Eleven duchies survived until 1918: Oldenburg, the two Mecklenburgs (east and west), Saxe-Weimar (as the grand duchy of Saxony), Baden, and Hesse-Darmstadt were grand duchies; and Anhalt, Brunswick, Saxe-Altenburg, Saxe-Meiningen, and Saxe-Coburg-Gotha were sovereign duchies.

The dukes of Normandy, Aquitaine, and Burgundy were practically independent of the French crown in the early feudal period, as also was the duke of Brittany, though the French royal chancellery at first accorded him only the style of count. Gradually, however, these great fiefs were reunited to the French crown. Thereafter they were granted only in appanage, as duchés-pairies, or peerage duchies-initially to princes of the blood royal but, from the 16th century onward, also to illegitimate princes of the blood, to foreign princes, and to other noble subjects of the French king. Duchés-pairies were hereditary, but there were also hereditary duchies that were not peerage titles, as well as life duchies (à brevet, or par lettres). Apart from those in the royal house of France, there were more than 30 ducal titles dating from the ancien régime still being borne (unofficially) in the 1980s, the premier duchy of France being that of Uzès (1565; registered 1572).

The great territorial duchies of Italy that survived into modern times were those of Milan, Florence (as the grand duchy of Tuscany), Lucca, Mantua, Modena, and Parma-Piacenza. The popes, the emperors, and the kings of Naples, however, could all bestow the ducal title as they wished and often did so; consequently, the title is now fairly widespread. The kings of the house of Savoy gave the title of duca occasionally to their offspring.

The Visigothic duchies of Spain disappeared after the Muslim conquest. During the Christian reconquest the title of duque was revived for honorific purposes. Apart from the Castilian duchy of Soria y Molina, created in 1370 for Bertrand du Guesclin, the title was at first usually reserved for royal princes, but, from the middle of the 15th century onward, it was accorded more and more frequently to other nobles. Of these latter creations, the premier surviving is that of Medina Sidonia (1445). The Spanish kings also created duchies very liberally in their Neapolitan and Sicilian dominions. By virtue of the right accorded to him by the Cortes, General Francisco Franco created three duchies in 1948: those of Calvo Sotelo, of Mola, and of Primo de Rivera.

John I of Portugal created the duchies of Coimbra and Viseu for his sons Dom Pedro and Dom Henrique after their capture of Ceuta from the Moors in 1415, and in 1442 he created the duchy of Bragança for his illegitimate son Afonso. Six more duchies were created for branches of the royal house before the Spanish annexation of Portugal. Thereafter duchies were accorded outside the royal house, but the total number of creations was far smaller than in Spain.

There were no English ducal titles (the duchies of Normandy and Aquitaine held by the English kings being, of course, French fiefs) until 1337, when Edward III erected the county of Cornwall into a duchy for his son Edward, the Black Prince. There followed the duchies of Lancaster (1351), Clarence (1362), York (1385), Gloucester (1385), Bedford (1st creation; 1413), and Somerset (1st creation; 1443), all for descendants of the royal house in the male line. In 1444, however, Humphrey Stafford, of royal blood only through his mother, was made Duke of Buckingham (1st creation). After the creation of the dukedom of Norfolk in 1483, the title became increasingly recognized as not being reserved for the royal blood.

In Scotland the title was first bestowed in 1398 by Robert III on his eldest son, David, who was made Duke of Rothesay, and on his brother Robert, Duke of Albany.

In the late 20th century, apart from royal dukedoms, there were nine dukedoms in the peerage of England (Norfolk, 1483; Somerset, 1546; Richmond, 1675; Grafton, 1675; Beaufort, 1682; St. Albans, 1684; Bedford, 1694; Devonshire, 1694; and Rutland, 1703); eight in the peerage of Scotland (Hamilton, 1643; Buccleuch, 1663; Lennox, 1675; Queensberry, 1684; Argyll, 1701; Atholl, 1703; Montrose, 1707; and Roxburghe, 1707); six in the peerage of Great Britain (Marlborough, 1702; Brandon, 1711; Portland, 1716; Manchester, 1719; Newcastle, 1756; and Northumberland, 1766); two in the peerage of Ireland (Leinster, 1766; and Abercorn, 1868); and six in the peerage of the United Kingdom (Wellington, 1814; Sutherland, 1833; Westminster, 1874; Gordon, 1876; Argyll, 1892; and Fife, 1900). However, the Duke of Richmond was also Duke of Lennox and Duke of Gordon; the Duke of Buccleuch was also Duke of Queensberry; the Duke of Hamilton was also Duke of Brandon; and the dukedom of Argyll belonged both to the peerage of Scotland and to the peerage of the United Kingdom. As a result, the 31 ducal titles provided only 26 dukes.…by the charming personal novella Early Sorrow or by Mario and the Magician, a novella that, in the person of a seedy illusionist, symbolizes the character of Fascism. His literary and cultural essays began to play an ever-growing part in elucidating and communicating his awareness of the fragility of humaneness,……worked again with Mortensen in Eastern Promises (2007), about the operations of the Russian criminal underworld in London, and in A Dangerous Method (2011), an adaptation of a Christopher Hampton play that explores the historical relationship between Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung. The existential thriller Cosmopolis (2012), which Cronenberg scripted……backdrop for her next novel, Eight Months on Ghazzah Street (1988), a political thriller charged with a sense of profound cultural conflict. Demonstrating her versatility, Mantel followed that book with a fanciful religious mystery set in 1950s England, Fludd (1989).El-Ferdan Bridge,  longest rotating metal bridge in the world, spanning the western shipping lane of the Suez Canal in northeastern Egypt, from the lower Nile River valley near Ismailia to the Sinai Peninsula. Opened on November 14, 2001, the bridge has a single railway track running down the middle that is flanked by two 10-foot- (3-metre-) wide lanes for high-speed vehicular traffic. Also called a swing, or double-cantilever, bridge, the structure is 2,099 feet (640 metres) long and has a steel truss superstructure 41 feet (12.6 metres) wide and 197 feet (60 metres) high at the pivot. Each giant steel arm swings open 90°, creating a navigational space 1,050 feet (320 metres) wide. This process takes about 15 minutes.

El-Ferdan Bridge was designed and constructed by a consortium of German, Belgian, and Egyptian companies. The fifth bridge to be built across the Suez Canal, it replaced another railway bridge destroyed during the Arab-Israeli conflict (Six-Day War) in 1967. The project was completed in less than five years and was an important component of Egypt’s National Scheme for Sinai Development; it reconnected the peninsula’s only railway line, which runs some 225 miles (360 km) from Ismailia to Rafah. The bridge was meant to be a catalyst for agricultural and industrial development in the region, but it was also geopolitically significant because it made it possible to cross between Africa and Asia in just a few minutes.… on the chart-topping single "Empire State of Mind," and in December she released her fourth studio album, The Element of Freedom. The Grammy-winning Girl on Fire (2012) featured a roster of guest producers and vocalists that included Nicki Minaj, Dr. Dre, and Keys’s husband, Swizz Beatz. The socially conscious……hot B-type stars, such as Epsilon Orionis, are characterized by lines of helium and of singly ionized oxygen, nitrogen, and neon. In very hot O-type stars, lines of ionized helium appear. Other prominent features include lines of doubly ionized nitrogen, oxygen, and carbon and of triply ionized silicon, all of……and during his teens his Escape to Nowhere (1962), a 40-minute war movie, won first prize at a film festival. He next directed Firelight (1964), a feature-length science-fiction yarn, which was followed by an accomplished short about hitchhikers called Amblin’ (1968). An executive at Universal Studios saw the latter film……they founded a secret society, Esperia, devoted to the cause of freeing Italy. In 1843 they began to agitate among their fellow officers and sailors, trying to get them to join a Malta-based revolutionary group, the Legione Italiana, in its plan for stealing a warship and bombarding Messina. The plot…Esquire,  American monthly magazine, founded in 1933 by Arnold Gingrich. It began production as an oversized magazine for men that featured a slick, sophisticated style and drawings of scantily clad young women. It later abandoned its titillating role but continued to cultivate the image of affluence and refined taste.

Esquire’s early notoriety became the subject of a celebrated court case. In 1943 Frank C. Walker, the U.S. postmaster general, attempted to withdraw the magazine’s second-class mailing privileges (an economic rate generally considered essential to a magazine’s survival) on the grounds that Esquire was "not devoted to useful information" worthy of the mail subsidy. Gingrich and his associates protested, enlisting noted writers in their defense; he brought suit against Walker and in 1946 won his case in the U.S. Supreme Court.

Esquire was a pioneer in the use of unconventional topics and feature stories. As it began to publish the work of Thomas Wolfe, Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, John Steinbeck, Truman Capote, and Norman Mailer, the magazine’s risqué image and its once racy air gradually receded. It provided an outlet for new writers of fiction and nonfiction, and its topical features, satiric humour, and excellent book, cinema, and music reviews filled a void between literary and opinion periodicals in the American market. Although the magazine continued to emphasize clothing and advertising directed to men, Esquire evolved into more of a general-audience publication.…Studies of Religious History) and Essais de morale et de critique (1859; "Moral and Critical Essays"), first written for the Revue des Deux Mondes and the Journal des Débats. The Études inculcated into a middle-class public the insight and sensitivity of the historical, humanistic approach to religion. Many of the……House is her adopted daughter, Estella, whom she is teaching to torment men with her beauty. Pip, at first cautious, later falls in love with Estella, who does not return his affection. He grows increasing ashamed of his humble background and hopes to become a gentleman, in part to win…
etrog, (Hebrew: "citron")  one of four species of plants used during the Jewish celebration of Sukkot (Feast of Booths), a festival of gratitude to God for the bounty of the earth that is celebrated in autumn at the end of the harvest festival. For ritual purposes, the etrog must be perfect in stem and body. It is generally placed in an ornate receptacle and was at one time widely used as a symbol of Judaism.

The other ritual plants used for Sukkot are a palm branch, or lulab (Hebrew lulav), myrtle (Hebrew hadas), and willow (Hebrew ʿarava). During rituals, the etrog is held in the left hand while the palm branch, with myrtle and willow entwined, is held in the right. On the seventh day of Sukkot, the four species are carried seven times around the synagogue. During the singing of specified Psalms (Hallel), the etrog and lulab are waved upward and downward and toward the four points of the compass to indicate the omnipresence of God.…and French films such as Europa ’51 (1952; The Greatest Love) and Viaggio in Italia (1954; Journey to Italy). During this time she married (1950–57) Rossellini, and the couple had two more children, including Isabella Rossellini, who became a noted model and actress.Exclusive,  in Australian history, member of the sociopolitical faction of free settlers, officials, and military officers of the convict colony of New South Wales, formed in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. The Exclusives sought to exclude Emancipists (former convicts) from full civil rights. Governor Lachlan Macquarie (1810–21) tried to introduce notable Emancipists into the social and political life of the colony, but he was opposed by the Exclusives. Immediately thereafter, imperial policy supported the Exclusionist position. By the 1830s, however, a class of lesser settlers joined with the Emancipists in calling for self-rule for the colony on a broadly representative basis. The Exclusives, who also favoured self-rule, countered this effort by petitioning the home government for a restrictive constitution that would bar Emancipists from political participation. The constitution granted to the colony in 1842 embodied the more democratic scheme, however, and the Exclusive position crumbled.…of the national government; the Federal Records Act of 1950 authorized the establishment also of "intermediate" records repositories in the several regions into which the country has been divided by the General Services Administration. Under the federal system of government each of the states of the United States independently has……render what is called a final judgment. Judgments deciding some procedural matter or intermediate substantive issue but not terminating the proceedings are termed interlocutory judgments. The forms of such judgments differ substantially between and within the world’s legal systems.When the regency of Algiers was invaded by the French in the early 19th century, Emir Abdelkader raised a resistance movement. He supposedly developed the flag design now used by Algeria, although evidence for this is lacking. The colours and symbols of the flag are associated with Islam, as well as with the Arab dynasties that ruled in Algeria and elsewhere.

It is known that Abdelkader’s grandson Khaled and the Algerian nationalist leader Ahmed Messali Hadj used the green-and-white flag in the 1920s as a rallying point for those opposed to French rule. In the 1950s the National Liberation Front and the National Liberation Army gave support to that flag, finally raised over an independent Algeria on July 3, 1962. Another symbol long popular on Algerian flags, the so-called Hand of Fatima or khamsah (the stylized silhouette of a hand), was represented along with a bright yellow ring in the green-white-green flag proposed in the 1940s by the Democratic Union of the Algerian Manifesto. However, the Hand of Fatima was not used in the flag of 1962-perhaps because of its association with the non-Arab Berbers and with traditional ways of life that the National Liberation Front rejected.Proposals were made in the 1950s for a federation of all the British territories in the Caribbean Sea, but the larger ones (in particular Jamaica and Trinidad) wanted separate sovereignty. As an alternative to maintaining the colonial status that had existed for centuries, Britain offered "associated statehood" to the remaining smaller islands, including Grenada. Although without military forces and international relations of their own, those states accepting the offer became entirely self-governing internally. Grenada entered into the agreement in 1967. Some of the Caribbean states adopted flags that they continued to use after achieving complete independence, while Grenada and others had interim designs only. Grenada’s flag had horizontal stripes of blue-yellow-green with a central representation of a nutmeg, one of the island’s chief products.

The nutmeg symbol was retained when, in anticipation of independence, a new flag was developed. Officially hoisted at midnight, February 6/7, 1974, this unusual design has a diagonally divided background of green for vegetation and yellow for wisdom and the sun. Around the edge is a red border, symbolic of harmony and unity. The seven yellow stars stand for the original administrative subdivisions of Grenada. This design is typical of the striking new patterns that many Caribbean countries selected to avoid the more common vertical and horizontal tricolours.Flight to Canada (1976) depicts an American Civil War-era slave escaping to freedom via bus and airplane.…1880; the final one, the Canadian Rugby Union (CRU), formed in 1891. Provincial unions were likewise formed in Ontario and Quebec in 1883, but football developed later in the West, with the Western Canadian Rugby Football Union not forming until 1911. The top senior clubs-the Big Four of Quebec and…
freedom of information (FOI),  a presumptive right of access to official information, qualified by exemptions and subject to independent adjudication by a third party. The adjudicator may be a court, a tribunal, a commissioner, or an ombudsman and may have the power to require, or only to recommend, the release of information.

The scope and application of freedom of information (FOI) laws vary from country to country. The first FOI law was adopted in the United States in 1966 and strengthened following the Watergate scandal in 1972–74. Initially, the American lead was not followed-at least not outside Scandinavia and northern Europe. The second wave of FOI laws did not begin until the early 1980s. Canada, Australia, and New Zealand all adopted FOI statutes in 1982, and during the next decade the spread of legislation gathered pace in Europe and the British Commonwealth. Throughout the decade, countries were beginning to borrow from one another’s experience. But FOI did not become an international norm until the 1990s. Championed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the World Bank, the Council of Europe, and other supranational bodies, FOI is now perceived as an essential component of open and democratic government.

The motives for adopting FOI statutes vary widely across jurisdictions and across time. Historians of FOI in the 1960s and ’70s correctly point to the intellectual origins of the new laws in the citizens’ rights movement, in consumerism, in distrust of an overmighty bureaucracy, and in the struggle for press freedom. But by the 1990s many countries were adopting FOI for quite different reasons: to obtain loans and, in particular, to fight corruption. This is indicative of a broader pattern. Individual FOI statutes are commonly the product of local political struggles, and their design is influenced by the objectives of the campaigners and legislators engaged in those struggles. They do not follow one, universal template; rather, they are tools shaped for particular purposes and crafted in accordance with local compromises.Frelimo,  political and military movement that initiated Mozambican independence from Portugal and then formed the governing party of newly independent Mozambique in 1975.

Frelimo was formed in neighbouring Tanzania in 1962 by exiled Mozambicans who were seeking to overthrow Portuguese colonial rule in their country. The movement’s original leader was Eduardo Mondlane. He held the nascent organization together, obtained support from both communist and western European countries, and built a force of several thousand guerrillas whose strength lay in northern Mozambique. By the mid-1960s the Portuguese colonial authorities had some 70,000 troops in Mozambique to put down the insurgency, but they did not prevail.

Samora Machel, a pragmatic military commander, became head of Frelimo in 1970, following the assassination of Mondlane the year before. After a left-wing military coup in Portugal in 1974, which signaled the end of Portuguese colonial rule in Africa, Mozambique attained its independence the following year with Machel as the first president. Frelimo subsequently restructured itself as a Marxist-Leninist party and nationalized land and the professions of law, medicine, and education. Women had been a part of the Frelimo army, and the equality of women was stressed by Frelimo and Machel, although many men disagreed with this position. Frelimo tried to revive the country’s shattered economy, but its efforts were hampered by its commitment to collective agriculture and by the destructive activities of the dissident Mozambican group known as Renamo. Frelimo and Renamo signed a peace agreement in 1992, and Frelimo won the multiparty elections held in Mozambique in 1994. Joaquim Chissano, who became leader of Frelimo in 1986 after the death of Machel, was the first elected president of the country.

Frelimo continued to dominate Mozambican politics into the 21st century. In 2002 Chissano announced that he would not stand for reelection in 2004, although he remained the party’s leader. Armando Guebuza, secretary-general of Frelimo, was chosen to be the party’s presidential candidate and was victorious in the 2004 elections. The following year he succeeded Chissano as leader of Frelimo. In Mozambique’s 2009 elections Guebuza was reelected, and Frelimo maintained its majority in the legislature. As Guebuza was constitutionally barred from a third term as president, Frelimo selected Filipe Nyusi to be the party’s presidential candidate in the 2014 elections, while Guebuza maintained his role as party leader. Nyusi was elected president, and Frelimo maintained its majority in the legislature, although it won fewer seats than it had in the previous election.

Meanwhile, tensions between Renamo and the Frelimo-led government had increased, and in 2013 Renamo revoked the 1992 peace agreement. In the following years, negotiations ensued, generating additional cease-fires and agreements and culminating in two significant agreements in 2019. Later that year, Nyusi was reelected and Frelimo won a two-thirds majority of seats in the legislature. Frelimo also took the majority of the vote in each of Mozambique’s provincial assemblies, which allowed it to fill the governor’s post in each province. The indirect election of the provincial governors was a new process in 2019-governors had previously been appointed by the president-and was provided for by 2018 constitutional amendments designed to decentralize power, a key demand of Renamo when it had been negotiating with the Frelimo-led government. Given Renamo’s popularity in some provinces and its success in previous provincial assembly elections, Frelimo’s sweep was unexpected.french fries,  side dish or snack typically made from deep-fried potatoes that have been cut into various shapes, especially thin strips. Fries are often salted and served with other items, including ketchup, mayonnaise, or vinegar. In addition, they can be topped with more substantial fare, such as chili. Poutine is a Canadian dish of french fries covered with cheese curds and gravy.

The origin of french fries is uncertain. According to one tradition, they first appeared in France, where they were likely a snack sold by street peddlers. However, in more recent years Belgium has been cited as the birthplace. The source of the name is also disputed. One oft-repeated claim is that a U.S. soldier who tasted the dish while in the Belgian city of Namur during World War I coined the term. What is not debated is the popularity of french fries, which grew exponentially after they became a staple item at many fast-food restaurants.

French fries can be made from various varieties of potatoes, though Russets are generally preferred. In addition, sweet potatoes are sometimes used. The potatoes are cut into different shapes, such as wedges, curls, or, most commonly, thin strips. After the optional but recommended step of blanching, the pieces are dried and then typically fried in a deep fryer. The oil causes french fries to be high in fat, which is linked to cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Flavouring with salt also poses risks to the heart. Amid growing health concerns, many fast-food chains, including McDonald’s, stopped using oil that contains trans fat in the early 21st century. To avoid or limit the use of oil, french fries can also be baked in an oven or made in an air fryer.…(1958) of Jules Verne’s novel From the Earth to the Moon, starring Joseph Cotten and George Sanders, and Robinson Crusoe on Mars (1964), a leisurely, almost contemplative update of Daniel Defoe’s tale. Haskins’s last film was The Power (1968), a chilling tale about a killer with telekinetic powers that boasted……outlined in the landmark paper "Genetic Control of Biochemical Reactions in Neurospora" (1941), by Beadle and Tatum, opened up a new field of research with far-reaching implications. Their methods immediately revolutionized the manufacture of penicillin and provided insights into many biochemical processes.
…developed separate kinship terms: a "genitor" is a biological father, and a "pater" is a social one.…Party (Partai Gerkan Indonesia Raya; Gerindra) in the July 2014 presidential election. Jokowi faced a legislative challenge, however, because Gerindra, led by Prabowo, was able to form a large-majority coalition in the parliament that included the PD, Golkar, and the Muslim PPP. In 2015 Indonesia’s economic performance was solid but…His first novel, God Sends Sunday (1931), about a jockey who was good with horses but inadequate with people, is considered the final work of the Harlem Renaissance. The novel was dramatized as St. Louis Woman (1946), in collaboration with the poet Countee Cullen. Bontemps’s next two novels…The Gorontalese, in the west and south-central part of the northeastern peninsula, are Muslims.Gospel of Peter,  pseudepigraphal (noncanonical and unauthentic) Christian writing of the mid-2nd century ad, the extant portion of which covers the condemnation, Crucifixion, and Resurrection of Jesus. Because the work reflects the view that Christ’s body had only the appearance of reality, Serapion, bishop of Antioch c. ad 190, believed it was written by a member of the heretical Docetist sect. Modern scholars are more inclined to attribute it to a Syrian Christian Gnostic because the Gospel does not view the Crucifixion as an act of atonement. But it lacks the mythological or cosmological speculations characteristic of most Gnostic sects. Possibly to convince non-Christians of the truth of the Resurrection, the Gospel of Peter goes beyond the canonical Gospels in claiming that Roman soldiers and Jewish officials witnessed the event.…1848 Cole proposed an unprecedented Great Exhibition of the industry of all nations. It opened in 1851 and was a resounding triumph, featuring "art applied to industry."In French, guillemets (<< >>) or dashes are used to mark quotations. In Spanish, since the middle of the 18th century, an inverted mark of interrogation or exclamation has stood at the beginning of sentences as well as the normal mark at the end; and quotations may……first Braille writing machine, the Hall Braille writer, was invented in 1892 by Frank H. Hall, superintendent of the Illinois School for the Blind. A modified form of this device is still in use today, as are later, similar devices. One innovation for producing Braille is an electric embossing machine……Ethiopia and central Eritrea; Argobba; Hareri; and Gurage. Although some scholars once considered the so-called Ethiopic languages to be a branch within Semitic, these languages are now referred to as Ethio-Semitic. They are generally grouped together with the dialects of the South Arabic language as Southern Peripheral Semitic or South…
Harihara,  in Hinduism, a deity combining the two major gods Vishnu (Hari) and Shiva (Hara). Images of Harihara (also known as Shambhu-Vishnu and Shankara-Narayana, variants of the names of the two gods) first appeared in the classical period, after sectarian movements, which elevated one god as supreme over the others, had waned sufficiently for efforts at compromise to be attempted. The dual form found special favour in Cambodia, where inscriptions and images from the 6th–7th century are known. In images of Harihara, the right half is depicted as Shiva and the left as Vishnu. The hands of Shiva hold the trishula ("trident"), a drum, and a small deer, and he may wear a tiger skin. The hands of Vishnu hold his characteristic conch shell and a chakra (discus). Half the headdress is shown with Shiva’s matted locks, which hold a crescent moon, and half as Vishnu’s crown; on the forehead, half of Shiva’s third eye is visible.Harold in Italy, Op. 16,  symphony in four movements with viola solo composed by Hector Berlioz in 1834. Berlioz wrote the piece on commission from the virtuoso violinist Niccolò Paganini, who had just purchased a Stradivarius viola. Upon seeing Berlioz’s first movement, however, Paganini found the piece to be insufficiently flashy for his own performance, and he never played it, though he confessed to admiring it and readily paid the agreed fee.

Berlioz later explained his inspiration for the work in this way:

The composition is structured in four long movements. The first, titled "Harold in the Mountains," carries the subtitle "Scenes of Sadness, Happiness, and Joy." It is an introspective introduction to the protagonist, a subtle theme, first played by the solo viola, that echoes throughout the work. The second movement, "The March of the Pilgrims Singing Their Evening Prayer," contrasts Harold’s lush romantic perspective with the pilgrims’ gentle religious fervour. The "Serenade" of the third movement depicts a mountaineer of the rugged Abruzzi region singing to his beloved. The English horn serves as the voice of the singer, yet Harold is there too, in the solo viola, observing the intimate scene. For the final movement, Berlioz turns to a more-animated episode, "The Orgy of the Brigands," but, even amid the tumultuous action, he recalls the earlier scenes, with musical echoes of the previous movements.Harriet Said (1972) deals with two teenage girls who seduce a man and murder his wife. Other novels in this vein are The Bottle Factory Outing (1974), Sweet William (1975), A Quiet Life (1976), and Injury Time (1977). In Young Adolf (1978), Bainbridge imagines a…Ḥarsūsī, and Baṭḥarī on the Arabian shore of the Indian Ocean and Soqoṭrī on Socotra. Ḥarsūsī has been influenced by Arabic, a northern Arabian language, to a greater extent than have the other dialects. These languages lack a tradition of writing, and thus almost nothing…
   During the first two decades of the 20th century, commonly called the "heroic era" of Antarctic exploration, great advances were made in not only geographic but also scientific knowledge of the continent. At the turn of the century, expeditions scrambled to… …release of Cale’s 1981 album Honi Solt, The New York Times hailed him as "one of the godfathers of new-wave music." He reunited with Reed after Warhol died in 1987, and in 1990 they released the album Songs for Drella, a tribute to their former mentor. Cale’s 1991 album Fragments…Igorot, (Tagalog: "Mountaineer")  any of various ethnic groups in the mountains of northern Luzon, Philippines, all of whom keep, or have kept until recently, their traditional religion and way of life. Some live in the tropical forests of the foothills, but most live in rugged grassland and pine forest zones higher up. The Igorot numbered about 1.5 million in the early 21st century. Their languages belong to the northern Luzon subgroup of the Philippine languages, which belong to the Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) family.

The Igorot peoples are Austronesians. They were known in earlier days for their wars and practice of headhunting. The Spaniards forcibly partially subdued them during the colonial occupation of the Philippines, that process being completed during the period of U.S. hegemony. Ethnologists distinguish about 10 main ethnic groups, each with its own dialect and culture. There are also variations within these groups.

Two broader groupings may be made of the Igorot as a whole: one, by far the larger, comprises the peoples of the higher country who cultivate wet rice, mostly in steplike terraces on the mountainsides; the other comprises peoples of the lower rainforest areas, who grow dry rice in seasonally shifting gardens. Within the first group the Nabaloi or Ibaloi, Kankanay (Kankanai), Lepanto or northern Kankanay, Bontoc (Bontok), southern Kalinga, and Tinggian nearly all live in populous villages, but one ethnic unit, the Ifugao, has small farmsteads of kinsmen dotted throughout the rice terraces. The second group-the Gaddang, northern Kalinga, and Isneg or Apayao-are sparsely settled in hamlets or farmsteads around which new gardens are cleared as the soil is worked out; some Gaddang live in tree houses.

Cultural elements common to the Igorot peoples as a whole include metalworking in iron and brass, weaving, and animal sacrifice. They believe in spirits, including those of ancestors, and have complex rituals to propitiate them. There are no clans or tribes, and political organization is generally limited to the village level. Kinship is traced on both the paternal and the maternal sides, extending as far as third cousins. Such paradoxes suggest the need for a more extensive theory of the mind than has been so far assumed. We have referred somewhat loosely to the sensory and intellectual components of human experience but have said little about the possible relations and dependencies that… …investment, the government established the Inch’ŏn Free Economic Zone, comprising several areas around the city. One element of the zone was the construction, on reclaimed land, of the planned high-technology city of Songdo, in which all residential, business, and governmental information systems would be linked via a common data-sharing system.     Although the influence of psychoanalysis, particularly on American psychiatry, was profound, it began to wane in the 1970s. Since then, those seeking treatment have tended to choose short-term individual dynamic therapy over psychoanalysis. This form of therapy is usually more accessible and… 
Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI),  Mexican political party that dominated the country’s political institutions from its founding in 1929 until the end of the 20th century. Virtually all important figures in Mexican national and local politics belonged to the party, because the nomination of its candidate to a public office was almost always tantamount to election. Originally called the National Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Nacional), the party was renamed the Mexican Revolutionary Party (Partido de la Revolución Mexicana) in 1938 and took its current name, Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido Revolucionario Institucional; PRI), in 1946.

The PRI was founded by former president Plutarco Elías Calles and his followers in a period of conflict with the Roman Catholic Church, rebellion in the military, and disputes with the United States. In effect, the party represented the institutionalization of the new power structure that had emerged as a result of the Mexican Revolution (1910–20), a coalition of regional and local political-military bosses and labour and peasant leaders. This governing coalition sought a more conservative evolution (though often under "revolutionary" guises) and more stability in government. In the new party-state system that emerged, party control came to be concentrated in the Central Executive Committee, whose chief was selected by the president of Mexico and entrusted with the task of approving party nominees for all important elective positions in Mexico except for the presidency. The incumbent president, who under the Mexican constitution could serve only one term, selected his own successor. The Central Executive Committee became responsible for enforcing a common understanding among state and national officials and among the various groups within the party.

The PRI’s establishment shifted power from political-military chieftains to state party units and to those sectors of the party representing peasants, urban labourers, and the military. President Lázaro Cárdenas (1934–40) enhanced the authority of the peasant wing of the party and balanced the existing party sectors with a so-called popular sector representing such disparate groups as civil servants, the professions, small businessmen, small farmers, artisans, youth, and women. The Cárdenas-led PRI government also granted asylum to Soviet revolutionary Leon Trotsky. In the early 1940s the party’s military wing was disbanded, and its members were encouraged to join the popular sector, which became the largest in the party. Under Cárdenas’s party reforms, the PRI established a large patronage system that doled out benefits to various groups in return for political support. Cárdenas also attracted support for the party by introducing land reform and nationalizing the oil industry (1930). Although the PRI could count on the enthusiastic support of large segments of the population, when necessary it used repression and, according to its critics, electoral fraud to solidify its position. For example, it violently suppressed student protests in the 1970s and was accused of rigging several elections in the 1980s and ’90s.

In the late 1970s the party’s political monopoly was seriously challenged when opposition parties gained a few seats in the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of Mexico’s legislature. The PRI remained in the majority but continued to lose congressional seats in later elections. In 1988 opposition candidates won 4 of the 64 Senate seats-the first time in 59 years that the PRI conceded losing any Senate election; and in that year’s presidential election the victory of the PRI’s candidate, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, was by the narrowest margin ever and aroused allegations from all of the country’s opposition groups that the party had resorted to fraud to maintain the presidency. Consequently, Salinas introduced electoral reforms, dismissed by some opposition groups as too timid, and dissidents within the PRI began to campaign for greater intraparty democracy; in particular, some within the PRI wanted to radically alter the candidate-selection process to remove absolute power from a handful of party elites. In 1989 the PRI lost the gubernatorial election in Baja California Norte-its first gubernatorial loss ever. Several states elected non-PRI governors in the mid- and late 1990s, and in 1997 a non-PRI candidate captured the mayoralty of Mexico City.

In addition to electoral reforms, Salinas introduced far-reaching economic reforms that liberalized the economy and privatized some state firms (e.g., the Mexican banks), and he negotiated a free-trade pact with the United States and Canada. Salinas’s government also passed legislation that reformed the education and agriculture systems and granted legal recognition to the Roman Catholic church (which had been stripped of its status in 1917).

In 1994 Salinas’s hand-picked successor, Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, was assassinated while campaigning, and the party subsequently chose as its presidential candidate Ernesto Zedillo, a cabinet secretary who had helped balance Mexico’s budget and improve the country’s literacy rate during the 1990s. Although Zedillo won comfortably, his margin of victory was the narrowest ever for the PRI in a presidential election. Zedillo instituted several reforms designed to end political corruption and promote freer elections. In the midterm elections of Zedillo’s term, the PRI was unable to retain a majority in the House of Deputies for the first time.

In 1999 Zedillo broke from tradition by refusing to nominate a successor. Subsequently, the PRI held its first presidential primary, which critics decried as fraudulent. In 2000 Francisco Labastida, the PRI’s candidate, was defeated for the presidency by Vicente Fox of the National Action Party (PAN). Zedillo left office later that year, ending the PRI’s 71-year period of continuous rule. However, the party retained control of numerous state and local governments and continued to be a major force in both chambers of the national legislature. In the country’s July 2009 midterm elections, the PRI made a comeback, winning the most seats in the House of Deputies. In 2012 the party regained the presidency with the election of Enrique Peña Nieto. In the 2018 national election, however, the PRI’s presidential candidate finished a distant third and the party’s representation in both houses of Congress plummeted. International New York Times,  daily newspaper published in Paris, France, that has long been the staple source of English-language news for American expatriates, tourists, and businesspeople in Europe. It is considered the first "global" newspaper.

The International New York Times’s roots are in the Paris Herald, which was established in 1887 by James Gordon Bennett, Jr., who had inherited the New York Herald from his father, James Gordon Bennett. After Bennett, Jr., died in 1918, Frank Andrew Munsey bought the Paris edition along with its New York City parent. His attempts to buy the New York Tribune to combine with the Herald were thwarted, so he sold the Herald to the Tribune, and the merger came about in reverse.

The Paris Herald Tribune enjoyed great popularity-as the Paris edition of the New York Herald-Tribune-and was affectionately called "Le New York" by many Parisians. The paper shared its own reportage with the New York Herald-Tribune and had full access to the parent paper’s stories. It was shut down for four years when the Germans occupied Paris in World War II, but it regained its old momentum and was faring well in the 1960s when rising costs, falling revenues, and a lengthy strike swept the New York Herald-Tribune into a series of mergers and eventual extinction. Rescued by a joint venture of The New York Times, The Washington Post, and Whitney Communications, the Paris edition was renamed the International Herald Tribune (IHT). The Post and Times companies were the sole co-owners until the New York Times Company purchased full ownership of the IHT in 2003. In 2013 the paper’s name was changed to the International New York Times.

The headquarters are in Paris, but the paper is printed in cities around the world. It also has an online edition.…2000 Olympic officials established the International Olympic Truce Foundation to encourage the study of world peace and the creation of progress in its pursuit. The foundation is headquartered in Athens and has endeavoured to institute a new kind of official Olympic truce that would, unlike the ancient version, persuade countries……author of Eisagōgē mousikē (Introduction to Music), a work that contains tabular descriptions of two forms of ancient Greek notation; the tables indicate the interaction of the notation with the Greek modal system. Although the work was written well after the music in question, it is of fundamental importance…Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),  transnational Sunni insurgent group operating primarily in western Iraq and eastern Syria. First appearing under the name ISIL in April 2013, the group launched an offensive in early 2014 that drove Iraqi government forces out of key western cities, while in Syria it fought both government forces and rebel factions in the Syrian Civil War. In June 2014, after making significant territorial gains in Iraq, the group proclaimed the establishment of a caliphate led by the leader of ISIL, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. International efforts to defeat the group led to its decline, and both Syria and Iraq considered ISIL effectively defeated by November 2017, though ISIL continued to hold a small amount of territory until March 2019. Certain affiliates with only weak ties to ISIL leadership, most notably Islamic State–Khorasan Province (ISKP; also called ISIS-K), remained active elsewhere.

ISIL has its origins in the Iraq War of 2003–11. Al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI), its direct precursor, was one of the central actors in a larger Sunni insurgency against the Iraqi government and foreign occupying forces. Under the leadership of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, AQI was responsible for some of the most spectacular and brutal attacks of that conflict. Shortly after Zarqawi’s death in 2006, the group combined with several smaller militant groups and rebranded itself as the Islamic State of Iraq (ISI), a change that reflected the group’s efforts to expand its appeal as well as its ambition to obtain universal leadership of the country’s Islamic militants. The group’s activities were greatly diminished when many of the Sunni tribes of western Iraq turned against it, however, beginning in 2007. The reasons for that reversal included the ISI fighters’ harsh treatment of the populace in areas under their control and a new counterinsurgency strategy that paid Sunni tribal leaders not to participate in attacks. AQI/ISI was also weakened by the loss of several of its senior leaders in attacks by U.S. and Iraqi forces. In 2010 leadership of the group was taken over by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi (birth name: Ibrāhīm ʿAwwād Ibrāhīm ʿAlī al-Badrī al-Sāmarrāʾī), who was able to elude U.S. and Iraqi forces until 2019.

The strongly sectarian cast of Iraqi politics at the time, and specifically the repression of Sunnis carried out by the administration of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki under the guise of fighting al-Qaeda and remnants of the Baʿath regime, ensured that the Sunni areas of western Iraq remained fertile ground for extremism. The sharpening of Sunni discontent, coupled with the gradual withdrawal of foreign troops, allowed AQI/ISI to make a recovery beginning about 2011, and bombings by Sunni militants once again became a frequent occurrence.

The Syrian Civil War, which began as an uprising against the regime of Pres. Bashar al-Assad in early 2011, provided new opportunities for AQI/ISI, whose fighters could easily cross from Iraq into eastern Syria. By late 2012 the assortment of mostly secular rebel groups that had been the mainstay of the armed opposition appeared to be weakening as a result of infighting and exhaustion, and Islamist forces took on a more prominent role. Those included the Islamic Front, an alliance of local Islamist rebel groups; the Nusrah Front, a network aligned with the central faction of al-Qaeda led by Ayman al-Zawahiri; and fighters loyal to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. In April 2013 Baghdadi announced his intention to combine his forces in Iraq and Syria with the Nusrah Front under the name Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The merger was rejected by the Nusrah Front; the split put the two groups in competition, especially for recruits, and eventually resulted in open fighting.

ISIL quickly established a zone of exclusive authority in eastern areas of the country that had long ago slipped out of the government’s control. In that zone, which centred on the eastern city of Al-Raqqah, it imposed a strict version of Islamic law. The group’s propaganda, which emphasized its successes in battle and its brutal treatment of enemies and those it deemed to be violators of Islamic law, was thought to have attracted significant numbers of radicalized recruits from outside Iraq and Syria, although the precise numbers remained uncertain. ISIL also seized critical pieces of infrastructure in eastern Syria, such as oil refineries that enabled it to raise revenue by selling oil on the black market.…pioneer in the vengeance tale Jane Got a Gun (2016).…on such popular hits as Jerry Maguire (1996), American Beauty (1999), and Black Knight (2001). In 1989 she earned an Emmy Award for her choreography on The Tracey Ullman Show.Among American Indian dolls, the kachina doll of the Pueblo Indians is noteworthy.…from the pro-Vietnam and communist Kampuchean People’s Revolutionary Party that was founded in 1951. The CPP was long the dominant party in national politics. The CNRP was formed in 2012 through the merger of the Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) and the smaller Human Rights Party (founded 2007). The SRP, founded…
Lawrence wrote Kangaroo in six weeks while visiting Australia in 1922. This novel is a serious summary of his own position at the time. The main character and his wife move to Australia after World War I and face in the new country a range of political…Tani, the Dafla, the Khampti, the Khowa, the Mishmi, the Momba, the Miri, and the Singpho. Linguistically, they are Tibeto-Burman. Each group has its homeland in a distinct river valley, and all practice shifting cultivation (i.e., they grow crops on a different tract of land each year)."Kholstomer" (written 1863; revised and published 1886; "Kholstomer: The Story of a Horse") has become famous for its dramatic use of a favourite Tolstoyan device, "defamiliarization"-that is, the description of familiar social practices from the "naive" perspective of an observer who does not take them……an additional one-fifth tax, the khums, to the Hidden Imam and his deputies. It is intended to be spent for the benefit of the imams in addition to orphans, the poor, and travelers.…rather than Iranian cultural preeminence; Kitāb al-maʿārif ("Book of Knowledge"), a handbook of history; Kitāb al-shiʿr wa al-shuʿarāʾ ("Book of Poetry and Poets"), a chronological anthology of early Arabic poetry, with an introduction that presented Ibn Qutaybah’s canons of literary criticism; and Kitāb ʿuyūn al-akhbar ("Book of Choice Narratives"), a…     Each player has two knights, and they begin the game on the squares between their rooks and bishops-i.e., at b1 and g1 for White and b8 and g8 for Black. The knight has the trickiest move, an L-shape of two steps: first one square… …the American architectural firm of Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates of New York City, it has 101 stories and reaches a height of 1,614 feet (492 metres). The building opened in 2008 after a construction period of 11 years. At the time of its completion, it was the second highest building……9th to the 16th century; Koshitsū ("The Understanding of Ancient History"), a critical study of the earliest documentary sources; and his autobiography, Oritaku shiba no ki (Told Round a Brushwood Fire; 1979).
…wrote, in biblical prose, the Księgi narodu polskiego i pielgrzymstwa polskiego ("Books of the Polish Nation and Its Pilgrimage"), a moral interpretation of the history of the Polish people.…works such as the large The Last Judgment (1440–45) and The Coronation of the Virgin (c. 1430–32), for example, the human figures receding toward the rear themselves create a feeling of space similar to that in the paintings of Angelico’s great Florentine contemporary Masaccio. The earliest work by Angelico that……monk, bishop, and chronicler whose Lausiac History, an account of early Egyptian and Middle Eastern Christian monasticism, provides the most valuable single source for the origins of Christian asceticism.…extant miracle plays in French, Le Miracle de Théophile ("The Miracle of Theophile"), on the traditional theme of a priest who sells his soul to the devil and is saved by the Virgin.…in the James Bond movie Licence to Kill (1989) and earned favourable reviews for his portrayal of a Mexican drug lord in the fact-based TV miniseries Drug Wars: The Camarena Story (1990). Del Toro appeared in such movies as Money for Nothing (1993) and China Moon (1994) before his breakthrough… The mallow family (Malvaceae) is a diverse group of flowering plants distributed nearly worldwide. Noted for their attractive flowers, many are grown as garden ornamentals, and a number are cultivated for their useful fibres. The following is a list of some of the major plants in the family, ordered alphabetically by common name.…companies is concerned chiefly with living trusts and testamentary trusts. Any person during his lifetime may convey property in trust to a trust company with instructions as to the disposal of the income from the property and eventually of the property itself. Such living trusts are used especially by the……was among the highlights of Looking 4 Myself (2012), an expansive album that found him increasingly influenced by electronic dance music. Usher’s eighth studio album, Hard II Love, was released in 2016. "A" (2018) drew mixed reviews.Lord Emsworth,  fictional character, the elderly absentminded ninth proprietor of Blandings Castle, Shropshire, Eng., the setting of many short stories and novels by P.G. Wodehouse-from Something Fresh (1915) to his final, unfinished Sunset at Blandings (1977). Lord Emsworth is almost invariably called upon to save the day (to rescue his dim-witted son Freddie, to thwart pig thieves, to enable young lovers to achieve wedded bliss), and he is frequently harassed by his snobbish sisters. His only desire is to be left in peace amid the perpetually summery castle gardens to devote himself to his prize pig, Empress of Blandings.Lysistrata,  comedy by Aristophanes, produced in 411 bce. Lysistrata depicts the seizure of the Athenian Acropolis and of the treasury of Athens by the city’s women. At the instigation of the witty and determined Lysistrata, they have banded together with the women of Sparta to declare a ban on sexual contact until their partners end the Peloponnesian War, which has lasted more than 20 years. The women hold out until their desperate partners arrange for peace, and the men and women are then reunited.Only with Macbeth (1847), however, was Verdi inspired to fashion an opera that is as gripping as it is original and, in many ways, independent of tradition. Just as the biblical theme had contributed to the grandeur of Nabucco, so the tragic theme of Shakespeare’s drama called…Manchu,  people who lived for many centuries mainly in Manchuria (now Northeast) and adjacent areas of China and who in the 17th century conquered China and ruled for more than 250 years. The term Manchu dates from the 16th century, but it is certain that the Manchu are descended from a group of peoples collectively called the Tungus (the Even and Evenk are also descended from that group). The Manchu, under other names, had lived in northeastern Manchuria in prehistoric times. In early Chinese records they were known as the Donghui, or "Eastern Barbarians"; in the 3rd century bc they were given the name Sushen, or Yilou; in the 4th to 7th centuries ad Chinese historians spoke of them as Wuji, or Momo; and in the 10th century ad as Juchen (Nüzhen in Pinyin). These Juchen established a kingdom of some extent and importance in Manchuria, and by ad 1115 their dynasty (called Jin in Chinese records) had secured control over northeastern China. The kingdom was annihilated by the Mongols in 1234, and the surviving Juchen were driven back into northeastern Manchuria. Three centuries later the descendants of these Juchen again came into prominence, but before long they dropped the name Juchen for Manchu. They regained control of Manchuria, moved south, and conquered Beijing (1644); and by 1680 the Manchu had established complete control over all sections of China under the name of the Qing dynasty. The Manchu managed to maintain a brilliant and powerful government until about 1800, after which they rapidly lost energy and ability. It was not, however, until 1911/12 that the Qing dynasty was overthrown.

Modern research shows that the Juchen-Manchu speak a language belonging to the sparse but geographically widespread Manchu-Tungus subfamily of the Altaic languages. At an early date, probably about the 1st century ad, various Manchu-Tungus-speaking tribes moved from their homeland in or near northeastern Manchuria to the north and west and eventually occupied most of Siberia between the Yenisey River and the Pacific Ocean. The Manchu became established in the south, while the Even, Evenk, and other peoples predominated in the north and west.

From the Chinese records it is evident that the Yilou, the Tungus ancestors of the Manchu, were essentially hunters, fishers, and food gatherers, though in later times they and their descendants, the Juchen and Manchu, developed a primitive form of agriculture and animal husbandry. The Juchen-Manchu were accustomed to braid their hair into a queue, or pigtail. When the Manchu conquered China they forced the Chinese to adopt this custom as a sign of loyalty to the new dynasty. Apart from this, the Manchu made no attempt to impose their manners and customs upon the Chinese. After the conquest of China, the greater part of the Manchu migrated there and kept their ancestral estates only as hunting lodges. Eventually these estates were broken up and sold to or occupied by Chinese (Han) immigrant farmers. By 1900 even in Manchuria the new Chinese settlers greatly outnumbered the Manchu.

The Manchu emperors-despite their splendid patronage of Chinese art, scholarship, and culture over the centuries-made strenuous efforts to prevent the Manchu from being absorbed by the Chinese. The Manchu were urged to retain the Manchu language and to give their children a Manchu education. Attempts were made to prevent the intermarriage of Manchu and Chinese, so as to keep the Manchu strain ethnically "pure." Social intercourse between the two peoples was frowned upon. All these efforts proved fruitless. During the 19th century, as the dynasty decayed, efforts to preserve cultural and ethnic segregation gradually broke down. The Manchu began to adopt the Chinese customs and language and to intermarry with the Chinese. Few, if any, spoke the Manchu language by the end of the 20th century.

China’s government, however, continues to identify the Manchu as a separate ethnic group (numbering more than 10.5 million in the early 21st century). The Manchu live mainly in Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang, and Hebei provinces, in Beijing, and in the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region.…portrayal of Nelson Mandela in Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom (2013) and for his harrowing turn as the Commandant, a brutal warlord leading child soldiers in an unnamed African civil war, in Beasts of No Nation (2015); for the latter film he earned a BAFTA Award nomination. From the helmet hangs the mantling, or lambrequin. When worn, that was made of linen or other cloth and performed the useful function of shielding the wearer from the sun’s rays; it also served to snare or deflect sword cuts. The mantling, or mantle,… …front of the image of Mariyammai (goddess of pestilence), is to deter her from unleashing an epidemic. Tumbling and leaping, the dancer retains on his head without touching it a pot of uncooked rice surmounted by a tall bamboo frame. People ascribe this feat to the spirit of the deity,…
Martin Marietta Corporation,  diversified American corporation (incorporated 1961) that was primarily involved in the production of aerospace equipment and defense systems for the U.S. government. In 1995 it merged with another major aerospace firm, the Lockheed Corporation, to form the Lockheed Martin Corporation.…famous of all Jain festivals, Mastakabhisheka ("Head Anointment"), is performed every 12 years at the Digambara sacred complex at Shravanabelagola ("White Lake of the Ascetics") in Karnataka state. In this ceremony the 57-foot- (17-metre-) high statue of Bahubali is anointed from above with a variety of substances (water, milk, flowers,……credited also with a novel, Matsura no miya monogatari ("Tale of Matsura Shrine," Eng. trans. The Tale of Matsura). Though it is unfinished and awkwardly constructed, its dreamlike atmosphere lingers in the mind with the overtones of Teika’s poetry; dreams of the past were indeed the refuge of the medieval…Melampus,  in Greek mythology, a seer known for his ability to understand the language of animals. The Bibliothēke ("Library") erroneously attributed to Apollodorus of Athens relates that Melampus received his supernatural abilities from two snakes that he raised after their parents had been killed by his servants. While he slept, they licked his ears, an act that startled him awake and made him realize that he could understand the language of the birds flying overhead.

Melampus was also credited (by Herodotus in his History) with having introduced the religion of Dionysus to Greece. Elsewhere he is reported to have helped his brother Bias to marry Pero, daughter of King Neleus of Pylos, by meeting the king’s conditions: the man who would marry Pero had to obtain the cattle of Phylacus, the king of Phylace (in Thessaly); although he was caught in the act, Melampus later cured Phylacus’s son of impotence and as a reward was given the cattle he had attempted to steal. According to another legend, Melampus cured the insanity of the daughters of Proetus, prince of Tiryns. According to Pausanias (2nd century ce), there was a shrine to Melampus at Aegosthena (a fortified place in Megara) and an annual festival dedicated to him.Merriam-Webster dictionary,  any of various lexicographic works published by the G. & C. Merriam Co.-renamed Merriam-Webster, Incorporated, in 1982-which is located in Springfield, Massachusetts, and which since 1964 has been a subsidiary of Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Among the dictionaries are Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language (1961), which contains more than 476,000 entries and provides the most extensive record of American English now available, and the 11th edition of Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary (2003).

(Read H.L. Mencken’s 1926 Britannica essay on American English.)

The G. & C. Merriam Co., founded in 1831, acquired the rights after the death of Noah Webster in 1843 to his An American Dictionary of the English Language. This work had first been published in 1828 and was the first American unabridged dictionary. A second edition had been published in 1840, and subsequent editions were published by the company in 1847 and 1864. The 1890 revision was given the title Webster’s International Dictionary and was followed in 1909 by Webster’s New International Dictionary, Second Edition, and in 1961 by Webster’s Third New International Dictionary.

Merriam-Webster dictionaries began to be published in electronic formats, including CD-ROMs and handheld devices, in the 1980s. In 1996 Merriam-Webster introduced Merriam-Webster OnLine, a Web site offering language-related features, including access to the full text of Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary and Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Thesaurus. In 2002 Webster’s Third New International Dictionary was made available online at a subscription Web site.Michigan State University,  public, coeducational institution of higher learning in East Lansing, Mich., U.S. It was a pioneer among land-grant universities and is a noted institution of research. Through its more than a dozen colleges it provides comprehensive undergraduate, graduate, and professional degree programs. The university has long been active in plant science studies and operates a plant research laboratory with the U.S. Department of Energy. Other research and public service facilities include the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory, a centre for continuing education in business, and centres and institutes for international studies, economic development, and environmental toxicology. Also on campus is the W.J. Beal Botanical Garden (created 1873), one of the oldest facilities of its kind in North America.

Chartered in 1855 by the state legislature, Michigan State University opened in 1857 as the Agricultural College of the State of Michigan, the first agricultural college in the United States. It is considered the prototype for the land-grant colleges created under the aegis of the Morrill Act of 1862. The botanist Liberty Hyde Bailey established the country’s first horticultural laboratory at the school in 1888. The school’s original focus on agricultural and mechanical arts later expanded, and its name changed four times before 1964, when it received its present name.

Notable alumni include educator William Chandler Bagley, football player Herb Adderley, basketball player Magic Johnson, and author Richard Ford.Their follow-up study, Middletown in Transition: A Study in Cultural Conflicts (1937), analyzed the social changes induced by the Great Depression of the 1930s. Although no longer typical of American communities, Middletown (Muncie) is still the site of studies documenting social and cultural change in the United States.Minos,   legendary ruler of Crete; he was the son of Zeus, the king of the gods, and of Europa, a Phoenician princess and personification of the continent of Europe. Minos obtained the Cretan throne by the aid of the Greek god Poseidon, and from Knossos (or Gortyn) he gained control over the Aegean islands, colonizing many of them and ridding the sea of pirates. He married Pasiphae, the daughter of Helios, who bore him, among others, Androgeos, Ariadne, and Phaedra, and who was also the mother of the Minotaur.

Minos successfully warred against Athens and Megara to obtain redress after his son Androgeos was killed by the Athenians. In Athenian drama and legend Minos became the tyrannical exactor of the tribute of children to feed the Minotaur. Having pursued Daedalus to Sicily, Minos was killed by the daughters of King Cocalus, who poured boiling water over him as he was taking a bath. After his death he became a judge in Hades.

Although Athens preserved a hostile tradition, the general account shows Minos as a powerful, just ruler, very closely associated with religion and ritual. In light of excavations in Crete, many scholars consider that Minos was a royal or dynastic title for the priestly rulers of Bronze Age, or Minoan, Knossos.Miss Prism,  fictional character, a governess and former nursemaid in Oscar Wilde’s comic masterpiece The Importance of Being Earnest (1895).…another strong female star with Miss Sadie Thompson (1953), a musical that featured Rita Hayworth as the prostitute from W. Somerset Maugham’s short story Rain. Although Hayworth was at less than her best, she held her own in this oft-filmed role. Beau Brummell (1954) offered Stewart Granger in the title……as Mission to Kala and Mission Accomplished), which attacks French colonial policy through a young man who, upon returning to his village with some hesitation because he has failed his college examinations, discovers himself to be not only revered by the villagers for his achievements but also alienated from their……interior until construction of the Moçâmedes Railway was begun in 1905 to Serpa Pinto (now Menongue), 470 miles (755 km) east. Though the interior developed, the port, which was dependent on fishing, had little activity until the discovery of iron ore at Cassinga (Kassinga) and the completion of a 56-mile…The modistae, grammarians of the mid-13th to mid-14th century who viewed language as a reflection of reality, looked to philosophy for explanations of grammatical rules. The modistae sought one "universal" grammar that would serve as a means of understanding the nature of being. In 17th-century France……in Seneca’s Libri morales (Moral Essays) and Epistulae morales (Moral Letters) reinforce the new direction in Stoic thought. The Encheiridion (Manual) of Epictetus and the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius furthered the sublime and yet personal consolation of the Stoic message and increasingly showed the strength of its rivalry to……2008 Kamkwamba had cofounded the Moving Windmills Project, an organization that works with residents of the Masitala area on such projects as drilling wells for clean water and installing solar panels at schools and community centers to provide consistent electricity. The organization also works with young Malawians to create simple……revealed in February 2014 when Mt. Gox, which had been the world’s third largest Bitcoin exchange, declared bankruptcy because of the theft of about 650,000 Bitcoins, then valued at about \$380 million.…soon adapted into a well-reviewed television series that premiered in 2018.…first number one hit, "My Ding-A-Ling." Although he recorded more sporadically in the 1970s and ’80s, he continued to appear in concert, most often performing with backing bands comprising local musicians. Berry’s public visibility increased in 1987 with the publication of his book Chuck Berry: The Autobiography and the……basis of Giuseppe Verdi’s opera Nabucco, while his supposed madness is the theme of William Blake’s picture "Nebuchadnezzar."…and approved by the elected National Assembly (Kuk Hoe).National Audubon Society,  U.S. organization dedicated to conserving and restoring natural ecosystems. Founded in 1905 and named for John James Audubon, the society has 600,000 members and maintains more than 100 wildlife sanctuaries and nature centres throughout the United States. Its high-priority campaigns include preserving wetlands and endangered forests, protecting corridors for migratory birds, and conserving marine wildlife. Its 300-member staff includes scientists, educators, sanctuary managers, and government affairs specialists.

Because of John James Audubon’s personal history as an enslaver, white supremacist, and critic of emancipation, several regional chapters of the organization chose to drop Audubon from their name in 2023 in an attempt to encourage the national organization to do the same. Despite such actions, the national organization decided to retain its current name, citing that the value of the organization’s work "transcends one person’s name" and that the word Audubon had risen to become a symbol for the organization’s well-known conservation mission.…for the presidency of the National Federation of Republican Women (for which she had served, since 1965, as first vice president), Schlafly began publishing The Phyllis Schlafly Report, a monthly newsletter intended to mobilize her supporters and inform them about political issues and candidates. In a 1972 issue of the……Yemen (FLOSY) and the Marxist-oriented National Liberation Front (NLF), for eventual control of the country. It was as a part of the NLF-ruled People’s Republic of Southern Yemen that Aden achieved its independence on November 30, 1967, and became the national capital in 1968 of what was known as South…National Museum of Afghanistan,  national museum in Darulaman, outside of Kabul, Afghanistan, displaying art and artifacts related to the country’s history and heritage.

Founded in 1919 and first housed in Bagh-i-Bala palace in Kabul, the museum moved to its current location in 1931. It houses a wide variety of archaeological and artistic items representing Afghanistan’s rich and varied past. The diversity of the museum’s collection is a result of Afghanistan’s location along the ancient Silk Road, an important trade route linking Asia to Europe and the Middle East, which brought a wide variety of goods, as well as new ideas, to the region. The museum’s permanent collection included objects such as Neanderthal remains, Buddhist stucco sculptures, and ancient Hindu marble statuary. It held a restored statue of King Kaniska and a collection of Bactrian gold objects (100 bce to 100 ce) that were excavated in northern Afghanistan in the late 1970s. The museum also housed one of the world’s most significant collections of Greek and Roman coins.

Many of the museum’s treasures were stolen or destroyed amid the strife that has plagued the region. During the civil war in the early 1990s the museum suffered catastrophic damage, including a devastating rocket attack in May 1993, and looters made off with about three-quarters of the collection. When the Taliban first rose to power in 1996 and seized control of the city of Kabul, the extremist political faction supported the safeguarding of Afghanistan’s cultural artifacts. However, the remaining artifacts were decimated in March 2001 when, in a complete reversal, the Taliban purged the museum of its pre-Islamic statues and images and destroyed the famed Buddha statues at Bamiyan.

The museum lay in ruins until 2003, when the international community funded repairs that allowed the building to reopen in 2004. In 2003 the Bactrian gold collection, feared lost during the years of conflict, was retrieved from a vault in a presidential palace, where it had been hidden with many other valuable artifacts for safekeeping since 1988. In subsequent years Afghan and international efforts continued to recover lost objects and to preserve the remaining collection. The museum also underwent an expansion that was completed in 2021, a few months before the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan. Although the museum was closed during the ensuing Taliban takeover, it reopened later that year.…left, notably by founding the National Revolutionary Movement (Mouvement National de la Révolution; MNR) as the sole party. The country sought assistance from the Soviet Union and China and voted with the more radical African states in world forums. Regionally, Congo extended concrete support and offered a geographic base for……early 21st century include the National Unity ofr Hope (Unión Nacional de Esperanza; UNE), the Patriotic Party (Partido Patriota; PP), the Grand National Alliance (Gran Alianza Nacional; GANA), and the Centre of Social Action (Centro de Acción Social; CASA), which represents the interests of Indigenous people. Generally, Guatemalan voters still…" By the Naturalization Act of 1870 this clause was virtually repealed for all persons who obtain a certificate of naturalization.…teams are components of either Naval Special Warfare Group One, based at Coronado on the West Coast, or Naval Special Warfare Group Two, based at Little Creek, near Virginia Beach, Virginia, on the East Coast. Each of the groups is also assigned an SDV team, which operates submersible craft designed…net neutrality,  principle that Internet service providers (ISPs) should not discriminate among providers of content.

With the proliferation of streaming services such as Netflix, ISPs pushed for the right to offer differently priced tiers of service to online content providers or software providers on the basis of their Internet use. Proponents of net neutrality believe, among other things, that network providers should be required to treat all broadband consumers equally instead of charging some consumers higher prices for using more bandwidth (data-carrying capacity). Opponents of net neutrality question whether cable and telephone companies could afford to invest in advanced security or transmission services if they could not charge a premium for them. In general, big Internet providers of content and software supported net neutrality, while the ISPs were against it.

In the United States the Federal Communications Commission initially issued orders in favour of net neutrality in 2010 and 2015, but, under the Donald Trump administration, those policies were reversed in 2017. As debate continues, individual states have also passed legislation concerning net neutrality.…in Gedichte (1832; "Poems") and Neuere Gedichte (1838; "Newer Poems"), demonstrate close ties to the Weltschmerz ("World Pain") mood of the Romantic period and reveal a personal, almost religious relationship to nature. His later poems, Gesammelte Gedichte (1844; "Collected Poems") and the religious epics Savonarola (1837) and Die AlbigenserAfter the tour for Never Say Die (1978), Osbourne left the band. A period of despair and drug abuse led to Osbourne’s divorce from his first wife, Thelma Mayfair. He then met and married Sharon Arden, who encouraged him to start a career as a solo artist. His first…
…album of the year, for Nick of Time (1989).No Exit,  one-act philosophical drama by Jean-Paul Sartre, performed in 1944 and published in 1945. Its original, French title, Huis clos, is sometimes also translated as In Camera or Dead End. The play proposes that "hell is other people" rather than a state created by God.

The play begins with a bellman ushering three recently deceased people into a room. They are Garcin, a revolutionary who betrayed his own cause and wants to be reassured that he is not a coward; Estelle, a nymphomaniac who has killed her illegitimate child; and Inez, a predatory lesbian. All the characters require another person for self-definition, yet each is most attracted to the person most likely to discomfit. Their inability to escape from each other guarantees their eternal torture.nonbinary gender,  gender identity adopted by individuals who feel that they do not fit into the traditional male/female gender binary. In the 21st century, the gender binary is increasingly considered to be a social construct that reinforces gender roles and stereotypes, a tendency that harms even those who are cisgender (that is, identify with the gender assigned at their birth). Those who identify as nonbinary may not feel that they are a man or a woman. Nonbinary individuals should be distinguished from intersex individuals: those who identify as nonbinary are typically born with  either male or female sexual characteristics, while those who are intersex are born with some combination of male and female sexual characteristics and often identify as cisgender. In contemporary gender discourse the concepts of sex and gender are often separated, with sex referring to biological attributes, and gender referring to a more amorphous conglomeration of behaviour, expression, and identity.

Nonbinary is an umbrella term under which many labels fall: bigender and pangender individuals may identify with both or all genders at once, while genderfluid or genderflux individuals may feel that their gender identity fluctuates over time. Agender individuals may identify as having no gender. Some nonbinary individuals identify as transgender, since they identify with a gender different from their birth-assigned gender, while others do not. Nonbinary identities are highly complex and subjective; adoption of these labels is considered a personal matter, and individuals who share the same label may still experience gender very differently from one another.

Those who identify as nonbinary generally consider themselves a part of the LGBTQ+ community. They may identify as straight, gay, lesbian, bisexual, asexual, or any other sexual orientation. Though sexual orientation and gender identity are separate, they share a close and complicated relationship. A 2021 study indicated that 26 percent of LGBTQ+ youth in the U.S. identify as nonbinary, though much of the discourse on sexual identities such as homosexuality or bisexuality is still very much rooted in the gender binary. As a result, nonbinary individuals may face discrimination even from within the LGBTQ+ community.

Some nonbinary individuals may choose to use pronouns that they feel reflect their gender identity. They and them used as singular pronouns are a common gender-neutral choice. Other gender-neutral alternatives are newly created "neo-pronouns" such as ze and zir or xe and xem. These new pronouns are an option for nonbinary individuals who may feel that conventional pronouns, such as she, he, or they, do not suit their gender identity. Some nonbinary individuals, often those who identify as genderfluid, may prefer multiple sets of pronouns, such as she/her and they/them. Among the controversies sparked by gender-neutral pronouns is disagreement about whether the use of they in a singular context is ungrammatical. However, English speakers have been using they in a singular context for more than 600 years. The Modern Language Association (MLA) and Associated Press style guides endorse the use of the singular they when appropriate, and in 2019 dictionary publisher Merriam-Webster named they the Word of the Year.

Like other members of the LGBTQ+ community, nonbinary individuals are predisposed to face some level of discrimination or oppression in their daily lives. Nonbinary individuals must function in what is characterized as a "cisnormative" society-that is, a society that operates primarily with cisgender identity being treated as the default. One obstacle faced by many nonbinary and transgender individuals is the separation of genders in public restrooms. Transgender individuals have a history of being harassed and attacked in public restrooms, and studies have shown that many trans people avoid public restrooms for this reason, which poses health risks. In the mid 2010s protests calling for the installation of gender-neutral bathrooms in schools erupted across the United States, led by advocates of transgender rights.

At the same time, some states saw major setbacks for transgender and nonbinary rights, such as bills that prohibited the use of bathrooms that did not align with one’s birth-assigned sex. By the late 2010s some school districts had worked to pass new regulations that would require gender-neutral bathrooms in all new school construction. California was the first state to see such progress. In 2019 California was also the first state to offer a third gender option on legal documents such as driver’s licenses and birth certificates. Over the next several years other states have followed suit, including Colorado, Maine, and Massachusetts. Others have moved in the opposite direction. In 2022 Florida adopted a law, commonly called the "Don’t Say Gay" law, prohibiting teachers in early grades from including instruction on gender and sexual identity. As of 2023 countries that allow nonbinary identification on legal documents include Argentina, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom.

Although nonbinary and transgender rights may seem like a relatively recent issue in the United States and other Western countries, diverse gender expression has been an integral part of many non-Western cultures for centuries. For example, some Indigenous peoples of North America recognize a third gender, or combination of genders, known as two-spirit. Two-spirit individuals occupied special roles in their tribes. In Oaxaca, Mexico, the Zapotec people recognize third-gender individuals called muxes. Muxes are born as male but adopt feminine traits and characteristics and function in the world as women. These identities tend to differ from Western notions of gender-nonconformity, for they often hold religious and cultural significance in the greater community.noncommissioned officer (NCO),  military officer appointed by a commissioned officer, generally to supervise enlisted soldiers and aid the commissioned officer corps. The noncommissioned officer corps is the administrative apparatus of the U.S. military, and NCOs are vital to the routine management of military operations for numerous countries. NCOs receive their authority from commissioned officers, who in turn receive their authority from a sovereign power.

NCOs typically function at the rank of sergeant but can also serve as corporals and petty officers (in the navy) and receive advanced military training. Tactical NCOs are responsible for training leaders for companies of cadets at the U.S. Military Academy, with duties ranging from teaching and supervising drill and ceremony procedures to military training.…divided into current liabilities and noncurrent liabilities. Most amounts payable to the company’s suppliers (accounts payable), to employees (wages payable), or to governments (taxes payable) are included among the current liabilities. Noncurrent liabilities consist mainly of amounts payable to holders of the company’s long-term bonds and such items as obligations…
The collapse of language in Norma (1994; "The Norm") and the division of the book into eight structurally distinct parts, one of which simply lists nouns preceded by the word normal’nyy ("normal"), reflect the breakdown of ideology in the novel’s Soviet society. The work, written between 1979 and 1984, demonstrates…The last of the Northern Song emperors was himself perhaps the most noteworthy artist and art collector in the country. His capital at Kaifeng was a city of beauty, abounding in palaces, temples, and tall pagodas when, in 1126, the Juchen burned it. The architecture of the Song era…In 1687 he published Of the Nature and Qualification of Religion in Reference to Civil Society, which set forth the civil superiority of the state over the church but also defended the church’s power in ecclesiastical matters as well as the freedom of conscience of the individual. His approach……an unsystematic way by the Office of Naval Intelligence, by U.S. Army intelligence, and by the FBI. The information gathered was rarely shared with other government agencies and was sometimes not even provided to senior policy makers. For example, because of rivalries between army and navy intelligence offices, which did……the Li River, and the Bian Canal in Henan. Of later canals the most spectacular was the Grand Canal, the first 966-km (600-mile) section of which was opened to navigation in 610. This waterway enabled grain to be transported from the lower Yangtze River (Chang Jiang) and Huai River valleys…The Olweus Bullying Prevention Program, a "whole-school" approach involving school- and classroom-level training and monitoring, is among the most widely used school intervention programs, and it has been shown to significantly reduce bullying, primarily in European contexts. Reviews of various prevention programs, however, find that the…His dialogue Eudemus, for example, reflects the Platonic view of the soul as imprisoned in the body and as capable of a happier life only when the body has been left behind. According to Aristotle, the dead are more blessed and happier than the living, and to……Willen in der Natur (On the Will in Nature), which skillfully employed the queries and findings of the rapidly expanding natural sciences in support of his theory of the will. The preface for the first time openly expressed his devastating verdict on the "charlatan" Hegel and his clique. He…operationalism,  In the philosophy of science, the attempt to define all scientific concepts in terms of specifically described operations of measurement and observation. The length of a rod, for example, may be defined as the number of times a certain stick can be laid end to end alongside it. Propositions that are not amenable to verification through measurement and observation are rejected as meaningless (see also logical positivism). Operationalists rejected the idea of nature as a thing-in-itself existing behind the appearances observed in experimentation. Operationalism is closely associated with the work of the U.S. physicist Percy W. Bridgman (1882–1961).…short time had dispatched the Opus majus ("Great Work"), the Opus minus ("Lesser Work"), and the Opus tertium ("Third Work"). He had to do this secretly and notwithstanding any command of his superiors to the contrary; and even when the irregularity of his conduct attracted their attention and the terrible……test, particularly by fire or water, is the most common. In Hindu codes a wife may be required to pass through fire to prove her fidelity to a jealous husband; traces of burning would be regarded as proof of guilt. The practice of dunking suspected witches was based on the…
 an overview of the variety of careers available in the health care industry.Painting to Be Stepped On (1960), for instance, was a canvas upon which audiences were invited to tread. Many of the works she created during this time existed primarily as written instructions for others to carry out or, in some cases, merely to muse upon.…… (founded 1947) in Germany, and Panorama (founded 1962) in Italy derived directly from it. Such magazines did not always develop in exactly the direction that Time had taken, but L’Express was radically changed at least twice by its owners; the first time it followed Time fairly closely. Der Spiegel ("The…>Paris 1919 [1973], and Music for a New Society [1982]), hard rock (Fear [1974], Slow Dazzle [1975], and Helen of Troy [1975]), and classical music–influenced instrumental work (The Academy in Peril [1972] and Church of Anthrax [1971]). He also produced seminal albums by influential proto-punkParis Agreement,  international treaty, named for the city of Paris, France, in which it was adopted in December 2015, which aimed to reduce the emission of gases that contribute to global warming. The Paris Agreement set out to improve upon and replace the Kyoto Protocol, an earlier international treaty designed to curb the release of greenhouse gases. It entered into force on November 4, 2016, and has been signed by 195 countries and ratified by 190 as of January 2021.

From November 30 to December 11, 2015, France hosted representatives from 196 countries at the United Nations (UN) climate change conference, one of the most important and most ambitious global climate meetings ever assembled. The objective was no less than a binding and universal agreement designed to limit greenhouse gas emissions to levels that would prevent global temperatures from increasing more than 2 °C (3.6 °F) above the temperature benchmark set before the beginning of the Industrial Revolution.

The meeting was part of a process dating back to the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, when countries initially joined the international treaty called the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Seeing the need to strengthen emission reductions, in 1997, countries adopted the Kyoto Protocol. That protocol legally bound developed countries to emission reduction targets. However, the agreement was widely believed to be ineffective because the world’s two top carbon dioxide-emitting countries, China and the United States, chose not to participate. China, a developing country, was not bound by the Kyoto Protocol, and many U.S. government officials used this fact to justify U.S. nonparticipation.

At the 18th Conference of the Parties (COP18), held in Doha, Qatar, in 2012, delegates agreed to extend the Kyoto Protocol until 2020. They also reaffirmed their pledge from COP17, which had been held in Durban, South Africa, in 2011, to create a new, comprehensive, legally binding climate treaty by 2015 that would require all countries-including major carbon emitters not abiding by the Kyoto Protocol-to limit and reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.

In the lead-up to the Paris meeting, the UN tasked countries to submit plans detailing how they intended to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Those plans were technically referred to as intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs). By December 10, 2015, 185 countries had submitted measures to limit or reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 or 2030. The U.S. announced in 2014 its intention to reduce its emissions 26–28 percent below 2005 levels by 2025. To help accomplish that goal, the country’s Clean Power Plan was to set limits on existing and planned power plant emissions. China, the country with the largest total greenhouse gas emissions, set its target for the peaking of its carbon dioxide emissions "around 2030 and making best efforts to peak early." Chinese officials also endeavoured to lower carbon dioxide emissions per unit of gross domestic product (GDP) by 60–65 percent from the 2005 level.

India’s INDC noted the challenges of eradicating poverty while reducing greenhouse gas emissions. About 24 percent of the global population without access to electricity (304 million) resided in India. Nevertheless, the country planned to "reduce the emissions intensity of its GDP by 33 to 35 percent by 2030" versus the 2005 levels. The country also sought to derive about 40 percent of its electric power from renewable energy sources rather than from fossil fuels by 2030. The INDC noted that the implementation plans would not be affordable from domestic resources: it estimated that at least $2.5 trillion would be needed to accomplish climate-change actions through 2030. India would achieve that goal with the help of technology transfer (the movement of skills and equipment from more-developed countries to less-developed countries [LDCs]) and international finance, including assistance from the Green Climate Fund (a program designed to assist, through investments in low-emission technologies and climate-resilient development, populations vulnerable to the effects of climate change).…other distinct preparations: pâté en terrine, a meat, game, or fish mixture wrapped in suet or other animal fat or lining and cooked in a deep oval or oblong dish, without pastry, and served cold; and pâté en croûte, a meat, game, or fish filling cooked in a crust and…
patriarch,  title used for some Old Testament leaders (Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Jacob’s 12 sons) and, in some Christian churches, a title given to bishops of important sees.

The biblical appellation patriarch appeared occasionally in the 4th century to designate prominent Christian bishops. By the end of the 5th century, however, in the course of growing ecclesiastical centralization, it acquired a specific sense. After the Council of Nicaea in 325, the church structure was patterned on the administrative divisions of the Roman Empire; thus, each civil province was headed by a metropolitan, or bishop of the metropolis (the civil capital of the province), while larger administrative units, called dioceses, were presided over by an exarch of the diocese, a title gradually replaced by patriarch. Some patriarchs exercised authority over several dioceses: the bishop of Rome over the entire West; the bishop of Alexandria over the dioceses of Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis; and, after the Council of Chalcedon (451), the bishop of Constantinople over the dioceses of Pontus, Asia, and Thrace.

Controversy over the growth of major ecclesiastical centres contributed to the schism between East and West. Rome maintained that only apostolic sees, those originally established by apostles, had the right to become patriarchates. The East, however, always took for granted that primacies were based on such empirical factors as the economic and political importance of cities and countries. Constantinople, the new imperial capital and the ecclesiastical centre of the East, had no claims to apostolicity, but new jurisdictional rights were bestowed upon it at Chalcedon (451) for the explicit reason that it was "the residence of the emperor and the Senate."

Five patriarchates, collectively called the pentarchy (q.v.), were the first to be recognized by the legislation of the emperor Justinian (reigned 527–565), later confirmed by the Council in Trullo (692); these five were Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, though, after the Muslim invasions of Egypt and Syria in 638–640, the bishops of Rome and Constantinople were alone in possessing any real power. Despite Constantinople’s efforts to resist any proliferation of patriarchates, new centres emerged in the Slavic centres of Preslav (now Veliki Preslav; 932), Trnovo (1234), Peć (1346), and Moscow (1589). At present there are nine Orthodox patriarchates: Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Moscow, Georgia, Serbia, Romania, and Bulgaria. Except in the title, there is no difference between a patriarch and any other head of an autocephalous (independent) church.

In Roman Catholicism, especially since the second Vatican Council, some effort has been made to restore the dignity of the Eastern-rite patriarchs as effective signs of collegiality, balancing Roman centralization. peak oil theory,  a contention that conventional sources of crude oil, as of the early 21st century, either have already reached or are about to reach their maximum production capacity worldwide and will diminish significantly in volume by the middle of the century. "Conventional" oil sources are easily accessible deposits produced by traditional onshore and offshore wells, from which oil is removed via natural pressure, mechanical walking beam pumps, or well-known secondary measures such as injecting water or gas into the well in order to force oil to the surface. The peak oil theory does not apply to so-called unconventional oil sources, which include oil sands, oil shales, oil extracted after fracking "tight rock" formations, and oil found in deepwater wells far offshore-in short, any deposit of oil that requires substantial investment and labour to exploit.

Proponents of peak oil theory do not necessarily claim that conventional oil sources will run out immediately and create acute shortages, resulting in a global energy crisis. Instead, the theory holds that, with the production of easily extractable oil peaking and inevitably declining (even in formerly bounteous regions such as Saudi Arabia), crude-oil prices are likely to remain high and even rise further over time, especially if future global oil demand continues to rise along with the growth of emerging economies such as China and India. Although peak oil theory may not portend prohibitively expensive gasoline any time soon, it does suggest that the days of inexpensive fuel, as were seen for more than a decade after the collapse of OPEC cartel prices in the mid-1980s, will probably never return.

The first person to advance the peak oil theory publicly was Marion King Hubbert, an American geoscientist who worked as a researcher for the Shell Oil Company from 1943 to 1964 and taught geophysics at Stanford University and other institutions. At a meeting of a branch of the American Petroleum Institute in 1956, Hubbert presented a paper in which he depicted U.S. petroleum production on a bell curve, starting from zero in the late 19th century, peaking between 1965 and 1975 at roughly 2.5 billion to 3 billion barrels per year (or approximately 6.8 million to 8.2 million barrels per day), and declining thereafter just as quickly as it had grown until production slows to 19th-century levels after 2150.  Hubbert further predicted that global crude-oil production, assuming untapped reserves of 1.25 trillion barrels, would peak about the year 2000 at roughly 12 billion barrels per year (some 33 million barrels per day), decline quickly after that, and eventually disappear in the 22nd century.

Hubbert’s theory for U.S. production was on the mark, as 1970 proved to be the peak year for oil-well production in that country, at approximately 9.64 million barrels of crude oil per day (compared with some 6.4 million barrels per day in 2012). Whether Hubbert was accurate about the global crude-oil production peak is a more controversial topic. Some analysts argue that a peak was indeed reached in the early 2000s. Others counter that the world has not yet reached peak production, that Hubbert seriously underestimated undiscovered oil reserves (especially in the Arctic, South America, and Sub-Saharan Africa), and that extracting methods have greatly improved productivity, enabling producers to get more oil out of declining wells than Hubbert was able to predict in 1956.

A core challenge to the theory is that calculating future global oil production remains a guessing game, as it requires not only a database of past production figures but also accurate knowledge of current reserves. While statistics on production in years past are easily accessible, oil producers often keep reserve figures confidential. In particular, Saudi Arabia has refused to disclose whether its largest fields-especially the huge Al-Ghawār field, which in 2005 was estimated to be producing five million barrels a day-are declining in production or are, at least, becoming more difficult to exploit. Still, there have been attempts to verify Hubbert’s projections. In 2010 the International Energy Agency’s (IEA’s) annual World Energy Outlook speculated that the global peak of conventional crude-oil production may have taken place in 2006, when 70 million barrels were produced per day. By contrast, the influential Cambridge Energy Research Associates (CERA) estimated in 2005 that current global production capacity would not hit peak before 2020.

Assuming that it is accepted that global oil production either has peaked or eventually will peak, the debate shifts to the severity of the subsequent production decline. Here most predictions do not see the steep downward slope that is implied by Hubbert’s classic bell curve. For instance, the IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2010 predicted that world production would "plateau" at some 68 million–69 million barrels per day for the foreseeable future-though by 2035 production of conventional crude oil might drop to 20 million barrels per day, with the difference being made up by increasing production from unconventional sources. CERA too predicts that unconventional sources will sustain world oil production well into the future. In fact, CERA holds that it is pointless to construct scenarios that strictly separate conventional oil from unconventional oil, as advances in technology and other factors have ways of blurring differences between the two.

On the other hand, some theorists foresee a more problematic future. For instance, Olivier Rech, a former IEA economist, publicly predicted in 2011 an annual decline of one million to two million barrels a day, with supply bottlenecks becoming noticeable by 2015. Oil producers have generally stayed out of the fray, though Jeroen van der Veer, then chief executive officer of Royal Dutch Shell PLC, declared in 2008 that "easily accessible supplies of oil and gas" probably would not be able to meet demand by 2015. Van der Veer’s successor at Shell, Peter Voser, added that any potential reduction of supply would not be due to declining resources so much as it would be due to reductions in investment and exploration by oil companies, caused in part by the worldwide recession that began in 2008.

Peak oil thus remains a contentious theory, especially as some of its most fervent advocates argue that higher oil prices and reduced production may lead to geopolitical convulsions and massive public unrest. If the theory holds, then the world’s oil-based economy will face a reckoning around the middle of the 21st century. Such a reckoning might spur a revolution in extraction methods, leading to more oil than ever before being derived from fracking, Canadian oil sands, and an increasingly accessible Arctic, or it might cause reduced dependence on oil and growing use of alternate and renewable energy sources. It is worth noting that Hubbert, the founder of peak oil theory, was a nuclear-power advocate who believed that the end of oil would mean not the end of civilization but its improvement.Peanuts,  long-running comic strip drawn and authored by Charles Schulz.

First published in 1947 under the name Li’l Folks, the strip, renamed Peanuts in 1950, featured a cast of children led by Charlie Brown, Schulz’s alter ego in the strip. On the surface, Peanuts did not differ radically from other newspaper comics of its era: the four-panel daily strips featured a simple, almost spare, artistic style and routinely concluded with a joke of some kind, often at Charlie Brown’s expense. The strength of Peanuts lay in the depth of its characters and in Schulz’s ability to connect with his readers through them.

The introspective everyman Charlie Brown stoically dealt with life’s misfortunes-from a kite-eating tree to a football that was always pulled away a moment before he attempted to kick it-with a sigh, a "Good grief!" or, most emphatically, with a "Drat!" Lucy van Pelt, his frequent tormentor and the big sister to his blanket-toting friend Linus, offered psychiatric advice and presented a steely exterior, but she could not resist observing that "happiness is a warm puppy." Snoopy, Charlie Brown’s beagle, made pithy observations and spent his time engaging in imagined aerial battles with a German World War I flying ace, the Red Baron, and fantasizing himself as jazz saxophonist Joe Cool. The strip’s other characters included Schroeder, the Beethoven-obsessed object of Lucy’s desire; Peppermint Patty, a freckled and frequently bewildered tomboy who referred to Charlie Brown as "Chuck"; Marcie, Peppermint Patty’s wisecracking sidekick; and Woodstock, a yellow bird who, in spite of his inexpert flying skills, accompanied Snoopy on his many adventures.

At the time of Schulz’s death in 2000, mere hours before his final Sunday strip was published, Peanuts was running in more than 2,500 newspapers in 75 countries, with a readership that topped 350 million. In the early 21st century, sales of Peanuts merchandise amounted to a billion-dollar-a-year empire, with products ranging from stuffed animals to clothing to a popular line of greeting cards. Snoopy was perhaps the most visible Peanuts character, appearing as the corporate mascot for American insurance company MetLife and making an appearances as a massive balloon in New York City’s annual  Thanksgiving Day parade, and his rivalry with the Red Baron was the subject of a pair of popular novelty songs by the Royal Guardsmen in the mid-1960s.

The Peanuts characters appeared in numerous television specials, including A Charlie Brown Christmas (1965) and It’s the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown (1966), as well as in a short-lived television series, The Charlie Brown and Snoopy Show (1983–85). They were the subject of the stage musical You’re a Good Man, Charlie Brown (1967; television adaptations 1973 and 1985) and The Peanuts Movie (2015), a 3-D computer-generated adventure. Over the comic strip’s 50-year run, Schulz refused to allow anyone else to draw or write Peanuts, and the collected body of work, amounting to more than 18,000 strips, was thought to be the longest story ever told by a single person.… (1870–1952) claimed that "periods of sensitivity," corresponding to certain ages, exist when a child’s interest and mental capacity are best suited to acquiring knowledge of such things as textures and colours, tidiness, and language.
…of what they called "permeation," targeted collectivist liberal politicians and radical social activists.The Phantasie über B-A-C-H for two pianos, nine solo instruments, and orchestra (1950) displays Fortner’s skill with 12-tone technique. In the Phantasie, Arnold Schoenberg’s original 12-tone system is modified to fit Fortner’s virtuosic conception. Fortner’s operas include two works based on plays by Federico García Lorca:…philosophical radical,   adherent of the utilitarian political philosophy that stemmed from the 18th- and 19th-century English jurist Jeremy Bentham and culminated in the doctrine of the 19th-century English philosopher John Stuart Mill. Bentham believed that "Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two masters, pain and pleasure" and that actions should be judged morally right or wrong according to whether or not they tend to maximize pleasure and minimize pain among those affected by them. He explored the implications of this principle for legal and other social institutions. Bentham’s theory was developed and refined by Mill, who held that actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote the greatest happiness of the greatest number. Other philosophical radicals included the economists James Mill and David Ricardo, the jurist John Austin, and the historian George Grote. They favoured economic and political liberalism and, although primarily theorists, they aimed at and achieved considerable practical influence.…work, Körperbau und Charakter (1921; Physique and Character), advanced the theory that certain mental disorders were more common among people of specific physical types. Kretschmer posited three chief constitutional groups: the tall, thin asthenic type, the more muscular athletic type, and the rotund pyknic type. He suggested that the lanky…pickle,  cucumber that has been pickled.

The small cucumbers that are turned into pickles are from the Cucurbitaceae family-the same family as pumpkins, gourds, and watermelons-and represent possibly one of the oldest pickled foods on Earth. Eaten around the world, they are very popular in the United States and are considered a delicacy in much of northern and eastern Europe. Pickles are also enjoyed in parts of the Middle East.

In the colder climes of northern Europe, the pickling liquid tends to be a flavour-packed concoction of vinegar laced with peppercorns, mustard seeds, dill, horseradish, salt, and spices such as chili, cinnamon, cloves, and ginger. In Russia, salty pungent slices often appear as part of the traditional appetizer selection known as zakuski that is served alongside shots of vodka. In warmer climates, such as in Turkey and Lebanon, brine-cured variants are found with olives, pickled root vegetables, and pickled peppers as an appetizer. Across the Atlantic in North America, the main flavouring is typically dill, the preference is often for a sweeter milder taste, and the results are more likely to be called dill pickles.

Crunchy on the outside and soft on the inside, a great pickle will deliver a perky tongue-tingling balance of sweet and sour. Flavours depend on specific recipes.prayer wheel,  in Tibetan Buddhism, a mechanical device the use of which is equivalent to the recitation of a mantra (sacred syllable or verse). The prayer wheel consists of a hollow metal cylinder, often beautifully embossed, mounted on a rod handle and containing a tightly wound scroll printed with a mantra. Each turning of the wheel by hand is equivalent in efficacy to the prayer’s oral recitation multiplied by the number of times the mantra is printed on the scroll.

Variants to the hand-held prayer wheel are large cylinders that can be attached to windmills or waterwheels and thus kept in continuous motion. The mantra on a prayer flag is similarly activated by the blowing of the wind.predicate calculus,  that part of modern formal or symbolic logic which systematically exhibits the logical relations between sentences that hold purely in virtue of the manner in which predicates or noun expressions are distributed through ranges of subjects by means of quantifiers such as "all" and "some" without regard to the meanings or conceptual contents of any predicates in particular. Such predicates can include both qualities and relations; and, in a higher-order form called the functional calculus, it also includes functions, which are "framework" expressions with one or with several variables that acquire definite truth-values only when the variables are replaced by specific terms. The predicate calculus is to be distinguished from the propositional calculus, which deals with unanalyzed whole propositions related by connectives (such as "and," "if . . . then," and "or").

The traditional syllogism is the most well-known sample of predicate logic, though it does not exhaust the subject. In such arguments as "All C are B and no B are A, so no C are A," the truth of the two premises requires the truth of the conclusion in virtue of the manner in which the predicates B and A are distributed with reference to the classes specified by C and B, respectively. If, for example, the predicate A belonged to only one of the B’s, the conclusion then could possibly be false-some C could be an A.

Modern symbolic logic, of which the predicate calculus is a part, does not restrict itself, however, to the traditional syllogistic forms or to their symbolisms, a very large number of which have been devised. The predicate calculus usually builds upon some form of the propositional calculus. It then proceeds to give a classification of the sentence types that it contains or deals with, by reference to the different manners in which predicates may be distributed within sentences. It distinguishes, for example, the following two types of sentences: "All F’s are either G’s or H’s," and "Some F’s are both G’s and H’s." The conditions of truth and falsity in the basic sentence types are determined, and then a cross-classification is made that groups the sentences formulable within the calculus into three mutually exclusive classes-(1) those sentences that are true on every possible specification of the meaning of their predicate signs, as with "Everything is F or is not F"; (2) those false on every such specification, as with "Something is F and not F"; and (3) those true on some specifications and false on others, as with "Something is F and is G." These are, respectively, the tautologous, inconsistent, and contingent sentences of the predicate calculus. Certain tautologous sentence types may be selected as axioms or as the basis for rules for transforming the symbols of the various sentence types; and rather routine and mechanical procedures may then be laid down for deciding whether given sentences are tautologous, inconsistent, or contingent-or whether and how given sentences are logically related to each other. Such procedures can be devised to decide the logical properties and relations of every sentence in any predicate calculus that does not contain predicates (functions) that range over predicates themselves-i.e., in any first-order, or lower, predicate calculus.

Calculi that do contain predicates ranging freely over predicates, on the other hand-called higher-order calculi-do not permit the classification of all their sentences by such routine procedures. As was proved by Kurt Gödel, a 20th-century Moravian-born American mathematical logician, these calculi, if consistent, always contain well-formed formulas such that neither they nor their negations can be derived (shown tautologous) by the rules of the calculus. Such calculi are, in the precise sense, incomplete. Various restricted forms of the higher-order calculi have been shown, however, to be susceptible to routine decision procedures for all of their formulae. See also propositional calculus. …continued to garner praise with Prick Up Your Ears (1987), a biographical movie about British playwright Joe Orton, and the American films Dangerous Liaisons (1988) and The Grifters (1990), for which he received an Academy Award nomination. He subsequently directed the comedies The Snapper (1993) and He also wrote the Principal Articles of the Religion, the first guidebook to Roman Catholicism written in Korean; it contributed toward the spread of the Korean alphabet, which had been generally neglected in favour of Chinese.     In all legal systems the prosecutor should bring an accusation only if he thinks that the available evidence, discounted by probable defense evidence, is so strong that the defendant is likely to be convicted after trial. In some countries, such as Italy, the… 
…in his own literary magazine, Prospettive (1937), and in many articles written for fascist periodicals. He also wrote a particularly controversial and influential discussion of violence and means of revolution published in French, Technique du coup d’état (1931; Coup d’État, the Technique of Revolution; Italian trans., Tecnica del colpo di……counselor in the 1990 film Pump Up the Volume. At that point he began to focus primarily on writing and got his big break with The Kentucky Cycle, a series of nine short plays that spanned 1775–1975 and chronicled three American families: African American, Euro-American, and Native American; the play……films, Quine garnered attention for Pushover (1954), a film noir starring Fred MacMurray and new discovery Kim Novak, who soon became Columbia’s premier glamour girl.qedesha,  in ancient societies and religions of the Middle East, a woman of special status. The exact function of the qedesha is unclear from the sources available, but it is known that the qedesha played a ritual role alongside priests and midwives. As with many classes of sacred status, the qedesha’s sexuality was at least partly regulated, but there is no reliable evidence that she engaged in prostitution as suggested by the Hebrew Bible (whence the word qedesha) and ancient Greek historians. The qedesha was typically born of high social status and could inherit and own property; her property could be passed on to her children after her death.Querandí,  South American Indians who inhabited the Argentine Pampas between Cabo Blanco on the Atlantic coast and the Córdoba Mountains on the western shores of the Río de la Plata. After the arrival of Spanish settlers, they are believed to have been absorbed into a larger group under the general name Pampas by which the indigenous peoples of the region are still known.

Little is known of the Querandí, but they are thought to have shared cultural characteristics with the surrounding plains peoples. They were hunters and gatherers, catching game with bolas and fish with nets. They violently resisted Spanish settlement and attempts to subjugate them during the 16th century. The adoption of the horse transformed Querandí life, as it did that of other plains Indians. They formed large nomadic bands and made war against other Indians and against the Spaniards. Scholars believe that disease and warfare took a great toll on the Querandí and other peoples of that region and may have prompted a southward migration.…stations were granted licenses, including Radio Normandy, which broadcast to the United Kingdom. Some of these private commercial stations continued operation, broadcasting under government control until 1945, when their licenses were withdrawn and radio became a complete state monopoly, independent of the Administration of Posts and Telegraphs but answerable to…Rage Against the Machine,  American alternative rock band known for incendiary political lyrics, social activism, and a hard-driving sound that incorporated elements of hip-hop and heavy metal.

Rage Against the Machine was formed in Los Angeles in the early 1990s and comprised vocalist Zack de la Rocha (b. January 12, 1970, Long Beach, California, U.S.), guitarist Tom Morello (b. May 30, 1964, New York, New York), bassist Tim Commerford (also known as Tim Bob, b. February 26, 1968, Irvine, California), and drummer Brad Wilk (b. September 5, 1968, Portland, Oregon).

The group self-released a 12-song cassette in 1992, which led to a contract with Epic Records. That same year the band’s eponymous debut album established a signature sound characterized by Morello’s inventive guitar work (which sometimes mimicked a deejay’s turntable scratching), Wilk’s pounding rhythms, and de la Rocha’s furious high-pitched rapping. Early hit "Killing in the Name" addressed police corruption, and other songs were similarly political. The group became involved in causes such as former Black Panther and death row inmate Mumia Abu-Jamal’s quest for a new trial, jailed Native American activist Leonard Peltier’s pursuit of parole, and the plight of sweatshop workers in less-developed countries.

Evil Empire (1996), which reprised the densely textured musical approach and militant lyrics of the band’s debut album, entered the Billboard albums chart at number one. The Battle of Los Angeles (1999) was also successful commercially. In the summer of 2000 the group staged a concert outside the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, after which a small riot erupted between some audience members and police. In October of that year, de la Rocha announced his departure from the band shortly before the release of Renegades, an eclectic collection of covers of rock and hip-hop artists, including Bob Dylan, the Rolling Stones, Afrika Bambaataa, and EPMD. The remaining three members went on to form Audioslave with former Soundgarden vocalist Chris Cornell. Audioslave produced three successful albums before breaking up.

In 2007 Rage Against the Machine reunited for the first of several concert tours, and the following year the band returned to its politically active roots by performing a protest concert in close proximity to the 2008 Republican National Convention. Although Rage Against the Machine never formally broke up, the band’s last appearance was in 2011, and in 2016 Morello, Commerford, and Wilk joined with Chuck D of Public Enemy, B Real of Cypress Hill, and turntablist DJ Lord to form Prophets of Rage, playing their first concert as a protest of that year’s Republican National Convention in Cleveland, Ohio. Their first album appeared the following year.…Bengal; the other group, the Rakhaing Marma, are recent immigrants, having come from Arakan toward the end of the 18th century, when their kingdom was conquered by the Burmese.…to inspire the group, and Ray Gun Suitcase (1995) and Pennsylvania (1998) were viewed by many as worthy additions to the band’s critically acclaimed oeuvre. Later albums included St. Arkansas (2002); Long Live Père Ubu! (2009), from Thomas’s musical adaptation of Ubu roi, with the actress Sarah Jane Morris singing……Classical philologist, began issuing his Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft ("Encyclopaedia of Classical Antiquities") in 1837. The new edition was begun by another German Classical philologist, Georg Wissowa, in 1893. This enormous work on Classical studies has no equal in any part of the world, though it can be supplemented in……Across the River (1966), and Red Sun (1971). He failed to catch on with American audiences, however, despite his prominence in Europe and in Japan. His subsequent films included Monsieur Klein (1976), Notre histoire (1984; Our Story), Nouvelle vague (1990; "New Wave"), and 1 chance sur 2 (1998; Half a……organized another new party, the Reform Club (Kakushin Kurabu), and the following year he again joined the cabinet, this time as minister of communications. In 1924, however, he destroyed this coalition government when he left it to join the Friends of Constitutional Government (Rikken Seiyūkai), the largest party in Japan;……the publication of the 50-volume Report on the Scientific Results of the Voyage of H.M.S. Challenger (1880–95). He also directed biological investigations of Scottish waters (1882–94), surveyed the depths of Scottish lakes (1906), and took part in a North Atlantic oceanographic expedition (1910). He was knighted in 1898. His writings……until 1980, when United Nations Resolution 478 called on member nations to withdraw diplomatic missions from the city. Italy maintains consulates in the eastern and western parts of the city. In May 2018 the United States and Guatemala opened the first embassies in Jerusalem since 1980. Diplomats living in the…resurrection,   the rising from the dead of a divine or human being who still retains his own personhood, or individuality, though the body may or may not be changed. The belief in the resurrection of the body is usually associated with Christianity, because of the doctrine of the Resurrection of Christ, but it also is associated with later Judaism, which provided basic ideas that were expanded in Christianity and Islam.

Ancient Middle Eastern religious thought provided a background for belief in the resurrection of a divine being (e.g., the Babylonian vegetation god Tammuz), but belief in personal resurrection of humans was unknown. In Greco-Roman religious thought there was a belief in the immortality of the soul, but not in the resurrection of the body. Symbolic resurrection, or rebirth of the spirit, occurred in the Hellenistic mystery religions, such as the religion of the goddess Isis, but postmortem corporeal resurrection was not recognized.

The expectation of the resurrection of the dead is found in several biblical works. In the Book of Ezekiel, there is an anticipation that the righteous Israelites will rise from the dead. The Book of Daniel further developed the hope of resurrection with both the righteous and unrighteous Israelites being raised from the dead, after which will occur a judgment, with the righteous participating in an eternal messianic kingdom and the unrighteous being excluded. In some intertestamental literature, such as The Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch, there is an expectation of a universal resurrection at the advent of the Messiah.

The Resurrection of Christ, a central doctrine of Christianity, is based on the belief that Jesus Christ was raised from the dead on the third day after his Crucifixion and that through his conquering of death all believers will subsequently share in his victory over "sin, death, and the Devil." The celebration of this event, called Easter, or the Festival of the Resurrection, is the major feast day of the church. The accounts of the Resurrection of Jesus are found in the four Gospels-Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John-and various theological expressions of the early church’s universal conviction and consensus that Christ rose from the dead are found throughout the rest of the New Testament, especially in the letters of the Apostle Paul (e.g., 1 Corinthians 15).

According to the Gospel accounts, certain woman disciples went to the tomb of Jesus, which was located in the garden of Joseph of Arimathea, a member of the Sanhedrin (the supreme Jewish religious court) and a secret disciple of Jesus. They found the stone sealing the tomb moved and the tomb empty, and they informed Peter and other disciples that the body of Jesus was not there. Later, various disciples saw Jesus in Jerusalem, even entering a room that was locked; he was also seen in Galilee. (Accounts of the locations and occasions of the appearances differ in various Gospels.) Other than such appearances noted in the Gospels, the account of the resurrected Lord’s walking the Earth for 40 days and subsequently ascending into heaven is found only in the book of the Acts of the Apostles.

Islam also teaches a doctrine of the resurrection. First, at Doomsday, all men will die and then be raised from the dead. Second, each person will be judged according to the record of his life that is kept in two books, one listing the good deeds, the other the evil deeds. After the Judgment the unbelievers will be placed in hell and the faithful Muslims will go to paradise, a place of happiness and bliss.

Zoroastrianism holds a belief in a final overthrow of Evil, a general resurrection, a Last Judgment, and the restoration of a cleansed world to the righteous.…denizen of China’s "lower depths"-Luotuo Xiangzi (1936; "Camel Xiangzi," published in English in a bowdlerized translation as Rickshaw Boy, 1945).Rigveda, (Sanskrit: "The Knowledge of Verses")  the oldest of the sacred books of Hinduism, composed in an ancient form of Sanskrit about 1500 bce, in what is now the Punjab region of India and Pakistan. It consists of a collection of 1,028 poems grouped into 10 "circles" (mandalas). It is generally agreed that the first and last books were created later than the middle books. The Rigveda was preserved orally before it was written down about 300 bce. (See Veda).…Space Administration (NASA) and a commission appointed by U.S. Pres. Ronald Reagan and chaired by former secretary of state William Rogers followed. Other members of the commission included astronauts Neil Armstrong and Sally Ride, test pilot Chuck YeagerRoman pizza often omits tomatoes (an early 16th-century import) and uses onions and olives. The Ligurian pizza resembles the pissaladière of Provence in France, adding anchovies to olives and onions. Pizza has also spread from Italy throughout much of the rest of the…rigours is the act of sallekhana, in which he lies on one side on a bed of thorny grass and ceases to move or eat. This act of ritual starvation is the monk’s ultimate act of nonattendance, by which he lets go of the body for the sake of his…
Schloss Schönbrunn,  Rococo-style 1,440-room summer palace of the Habsburgs in Vienna. Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach’s first design for the building, meant to rival France’s Palace of Versailles, was done in 1690. A second, somewhat less ornate, plan, however, dating from 1695–96 was adopted, and the palace was finished by 1711. The palace and its gardens were designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1996.

It was first modified in 1737 by Johann’s son Josef Emanuel Fischer von Erlach and again in 1744 by Nikolaus Pacassi. The formal gardens were originally laid out c. 1705–06 by Jean-Nicolas Jadot de Ville-Issey and from 1765 were redesigned by Ferdinand von Hohenberg. Schönbrunn Tiergarten, perhaps the oldest zoo in Europe, was founded within the grounds in 1752. The entire park complex, open to the public since 1918, covers more than 2 sq km (3/4 sq mi).…the Canadian sketch comedy show SCTV. Levy later noted that he learned important lessons from working on the program. In 2020 he told Variety that he did not know how to write for television when he first joined SCTV:secession,  in U.S. history, the withdrawal of 11 slave states (states in which slaveholding was legal) from the Union during 1860–61 following the election of Abraham Lincoln as president. Secession precipitated the American Civil War.

Secession had a long history in the United States-but as a threat rather than as an actual dissolution of the Union. Pro-secessionists found philosophical justification for altering or abolishing a government and instituting a new one in the Declaration of Independence. More specifically, those who held that the Union was simply a compact among the states argued that states could secede from that compact just as they had earlier acceded to it.

While never counseling secession, James Madison and Thomas Jefferson had clearly enunciated the states’ rights-compact doctrine in the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of 1798. Their political opponents, New England Federalists, briefly considered withdrawing from the Union at the Hartford Convention in 1814. The Mississippi question elicited hints of secession from proslavery states, but the famous Missouri Compromise (1820) temporarily quieted the agitation. South Carolinians, however, went to the very brink of secession in the 1830s over the tariff question.

From the 1840s to 1860, Southerners frequently threatened to withdraw from the Union as antislavery sentiment in the North grew stronger. The Compromise of 1850 eased some of the sectional strife, but the problem of permitting or prohibiting slavery in the western territories continued to inflame opinion on both sides throughout the 1850s.

The Republican Party formed during this decade around the idea that the territories should remain free; i.e., slaveholding should not be permitted in them. Southerners vowed that the election of a Republican president in 1860 would make secession a certainty. When the Democratic Party disintegrated in 1860 over the slavery-extension question, Lincoln was elected as the first Republican president.

On December 20, 1860, a special convention called in South Carolina unanimously passed an ordinance of secession. Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, and Louisiana followed in January, and Texas voted to secede on February 1, 1861-still more than a month before Lincoln was actually inaugurated. Pres. James Buchanan denied the right of secession, but he also denied the right of the federal government to use force against the seceded states.

Lincoln waited a month after his inauguration before deciding to send provisions to Fort Sumter in the harbour of Charleston, South Carolina. On April 12, 1861, Confederate guns opened fire on the fort, and the Civil War began. Forced now to make a choice between the Union and the Confederacy, the states of the Upper South-Virginia, North Carolina, Arkansas, and Tennessee-voted to secede.secretary,  a writing desk fitted with drawers, one of which can be pulled out and the front lowered to provide a flat writing surface. There are many variations to this basic design. Early versions, which appeared in France in the first half of the 18th century, were made in one piece divided into two sections. The lower section consisted of a cupboard compartment closed in by solid or sliding doors that sometimes concealed a set of drawers; in some cases, however, the drawers were open to view. The upper section included a drop front that, when lowered, provided the writing surface and revealed an inner section fitted with various receptacles (such as pigeonholes, drawers, and recesses) for ink, paper, documents, and the like. Although this type persisted, a number of variations occurred, such as the addition of mirror doors above the upper, drop-front section and, later, the insertion of a space in the lower part of the secretary to accommodate the knees of the writer, the drawers being divided into two sections on either side of the arched recess.

Although the secretary was designed to satisfy a variety of needs, by the early 19th century the designs were becoming lighter and more elegant. The solid lower section was now frequently replaced by legs-sometimes, in the more fanciful flights of Regency designers, carved to simulate those of animals-and the unit took on the appearance of a table rather than a chest. The upper portion of these secretaries was often provided with a tambour top, which concealed drawers and pigeonholes. A tendency to use elaborate decorations of ormolu and other metals emphasizes a concept of the secretary that was to dominate in the 19th century: that it was essentially a feminine article of furniture, intended for the boudoir rather than the library. The result of this concept, especially in the period of the Second Empire in France, was that the secretary became a luxury object. In the 20th century the form tends to survive only in reproduction form, though some of its principles have been incorporated into fitted furniture units of various kinds.With Shock Corridor (1963) and The Naked Kiss (1964), both made for Allied Artists, Fuller had almost total freedom, resulting in two of his most accomplished-and disturbing-works. Shock Corridor starred Peter Breck as a reporter who has himself committed to an institution in order to track……dealing box called a "shoe." Players aim for a total count of nine, or as close as they can get, in a hand of two or three cards. Face (court) cards and 10s are counted as zero; all others take their index value. The cards in each hand are…(1855; Signs of the Times), defended religious and personal freedom at a time when reaction was triumphant in Europe.…in Machete Kills (2013) and Sin City: A Dame to Kill For (2014). She played a vampiric countess with no regard for life or suffering in the fifth season of the television show American Horror Story: Hotel (2015–16). For her performance in the anthology series, Lady Gaga received a Golden……include Laborintus II (1965) and Sinfonia (1968), which incorporate a wide range of literary and musical references. Sinfonia also gathers a large performance force using an orchestra, organ, harpsichord, piano, chorus, and reciters. Berio’s Coro (1976) is written for 40 voices and 40 instruments. Among his later pieces are the…Singanhoe,   united national independence front formed by the Korean nationalists and the Korean communists that was organized in 1927 to seek more concerted efforts toward winning Korea’s independence from Japan. The group attempted to encourage a national consciousness and promote anti-Japanese feeling. It sponsored studies of the Korean language, demanded freedom of thought, and supported scientific research in Korean universities. At its height the Singanhoe claimed 138 branches and 37,000 members, but, owing to Japanese oppression and internal dissension between nationalists and communists, the organization was dissolved in 1931.slash-and-burn agriculture,  method of cultivation in which forests are burned and cleared for planting. Slash-and-burn agriculture is often used by tropical-forest root-crop farmers in various parts of the world, for animal grazing in South and Central America, and by dry-rice cultivators in the forested hill country of Southeast Asia. The ash provides some fertilization, and the plot is relatively free of weeds. After several years of cultivation, fertility declines and weeds increase.

Then, as traditionally practiced by indigenous peoples and subsistence farmers, the area would be left fallow and reverted to a secondary forest of bush. Cultivation would shift to a new plot. After about a decade the old site could be reused. Such practices can be considered sustainable, as they do not require outside inputs such as synthetic fertilizers, and small clearings can recover as forest over time. (See also shifting agriculture.)

By the early 21st century, however, cleared areas were typically maintained in a deforested state permanently, causing habitat fragmentation and biodiversity loss. Although traditional practices generally contributed few greenhouse gases because of their scale, modern slash-and-burn techniques are a significant source of carbon dioxide emissions, especially when used to initiate permanent deforestation. Forests sequester carbon in the form of wood and other biomass as the trees grow, taking up carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. When forests are burned, their carbon is returned to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide, a potent greenhouse gas that is altering global climate (see global warming), and the trees are no longer present to sequester more carbon. In Southeast Asia, slash-and-burn agriculture for oil palm cultivation has been a major source of annual air pollution from smoke. Although this form of agriculture is strongly associated with the deforestation of tropical rainforests such as the Amazon, slash-and-burn practices are also responsible for the loss of large areas of tropical dry forests, where the dry season permits a better burn.…1877 he also founded the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings in an attempt to combat the drastic methods of restoration then being carried out on the cathedrals and parish churches of Great Britain.…assigning value to so-called "soft" assets such as brand image, corporate reputation, goodwill, and human capital. These can be among the most valuable assets controlled by the entity, yet they might be undervalued or ignored altogether under current practices.
Spanish treasure fleet,  from the 16th to the 18th century, Spanish convoy of ships transporting European goods to the Spanish colonies in the Americas and transporting colonial products, especially gold and silver, back to the mother country.

Beginning in the 1560s, shipping between Spain and the Americas was organized on a regular basis. In general, two fleets of between 30 and 90 vessels sailed from Sevilla (Seville) to the American colonies each year: the flota left in the spring for Vera Cruz, in what is now Mexico, detaching ships in the West Indies and at Honduras on the way; the galeones, or Tierra Firme fleet, left in August for Cartagena, in present Colombia, and Porto Bello (now Portobelo), on the Atlantic coast of Panama. After wintering in America, both fleets met at Havana the following spring and returned to Spain together, protected by warships.

The immense wealth in gold and silver carried by these fleets on the return voyage offered a tempting prize to English, Dutch, and French seamen. One fleet was looted and destroyed by the Dutch admiral Piet Heyn off Cuba (1628) and another by the English under Robert Blake in the Azores (1657), but usually the Spanish treasure fleet presented a formidable challenge to marauders.

By the 18th century, Spain had greater control over the sea-lanes and had changed its policies to allow freer trade among Spanish and American ports. As unlimited sailings became the norm, the fleet system declined in importance. The galeones were discontinued in 1740 and the flota in 1789. See also Manila galleon. The Sperrgebiet National Park formally opened in 2009.…markets, when demand, supply, and spot prices are expected to remain unchanged for some months to come and there is uncertainty in traders’ minds regarding these expectations, the futures price, say, for one month’s delivery is bound to be below the spot price that traders expect to prevail one month……known for his partially autobiographical Sprickorna i muren (1971–78; "The Cracks in the Wall"), called by some his Divine Comedy for its richness and broad scope. In it the protagonist progresses from his childhood hell to the terminal cancer patient’s private paradise of pain relief.Delany’s complex Stars in My Pocket Like Grains of Sand (1984) was regarded by critics as a stylistic breakthrough. His subsequent novels include Dark Reflections (2007), which portrays an aging gay Black poet as he lives through successes and disappointments, and Through the Valley of the Nest…Founded in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1960 by country music fiddle player Jim Stewart and his sister Estelle Axton, following a previous false start with Satellite Records, Stax maintained a down-home, family atmosphere during its early years. Black and white musicians and singers worked together in relaxed conditions, where nobody looked at a clock or worried about union session rates, at the recording studio in a converted movie theatre at 926 East McLemore. They created records from ideas jotted down on bits of paper, phrases remembered from gospel songs, and rhythm licks that might make the kids on American Bandstand dance.  Guitarist Steve Cropper, organist Booker T. Jones, bassist Donald ("Duck") Dunn, and drummer Al Jackson, Jr.,  had numerous hits as Booker T. and the MG’s, and they made many more records as the rhythm section (and, in effect, producers) for most of the recordings at Stax during the decade, sometimes aided and abetted by pianist Isaac Hayes and lyricist David Porter, who teamed up as writer-producers in 1964.

Many Stax records featured a distinctive horn sound, and their bass-heavy bottom end had a powerful impact when played on jukeboxes and in dance clubs.  Jerry Wexler of Atlantic Records was the earliest industry figure to recognize the potential of this Memphis Sound. Wexler made a deal that allowed Atlantic to distribute Stax both nationally and internationally; he also was the catalyst for several milestone records made by singers from out of town: "Respect" (1965) by Otis Redding (from Georgia), whose records were released on the subsidiary label Volt; "In the Midnight Hour" (1965) by Wilson Pickett (from Alabama by way of Detroit), released on Atlantic; and "Soul Man" (1962) by  Sam and Dave (from Florida). Toward the end of the 1960s, the interracial harmony at Stax was disturbed by the social and political tension sweeping the nation, which culminated in the murder of  Martin Luther King, Jr., in a nearby motel.

Still under its original management but represented publicly by Al Bell, the black promotion man who became vice-president and co-owner, Stax achieved its greatest commercial success during the early 1970s with hits recorded in Detroit, Chicago, and Muscle Shoals, Alabama, as well as in its own studios, by Johnnie Taylor, Hayes, the Staple Singers, the Dramatics, and others.  Many of the songs of this era, along with members of the original rhythm section, resurfaced in the movie The Blues Brothers (1980).…undertakings-the majority, like the Swiss Stumpelbotten, purely local in scope. Some, like the Paar family in Austria, developed postal organizations on a national scale. By far the most famous and extensive of such systems was that built up by the Thurn and Taxis family, who originally came from Bergamo near…Sublime Porte,  the government of the Ottoman Empire. The name is a French translation of Turkish Bâbıâli ("High Gate," or "Gate of the Eminent"). which was the official name of the gate giving access to the block of buildings in Constantinople, or Istanbul, that housed the principal state departments. Early in the history of the Ottoman Empire, the grand viziers became powerful, but only in the 17th century did they acquire the official residence, Bâbıâli, which became the real centre of government. There, too, were the offices of the foreign ministry and the council of state; hence the application of the term to the government as a whole. In the late 20th century, the buildings were the seat of a provincial governorate.…first concerns their level of subsistence, long deemed to have been one of chronic scarcity and want. According to the still controversial findings of the American anthropologist Marshall Sahlins, this notion of scarcity is not true. His studies of several preliterate peoples found that they could easily increase their provisioning…
Sullivan’s Travels,  American dramedy film, released in 1941, considered by many to be director Preston Sturges’s finest film. The title is taken from Jonathan Swift’s classic tale of self-discovery, Gulliver’s Travels (1726).

The plot involves John Lloyd Sullivan (played by Joel McCrea), a pampered Hollywood director  who decides to make a film about the downtrodden of society. He researches the subject by setting off with only a dime in his pocket. His adventures and misadventures lead to some unexpected consequences, including his arrest for his own murder. He learns to identify with the masses and their everyday stuggles through the disastrous string of events that befall him. Veronica Lake (who was six months pregnant at the time of filming) played a struggling actress who accompanies McCrea on his "travels."

Reception was mixed when Sullivan’s Travels was released, though it later received greater recognition. Sturges’s films were often more acclaimed in retrospect than they were in his day, and the same holds true for McCrea, whose work as an actor is often considered undervalued. The title of the pretentious epic that McCrea’s fictional director threatens to make is O Brother, Where Art Thou, which, in homage to Sturges, became the title of a 2000 Coen brothers film.…hit song aptly titled "Supermodel," which mentioned the year’s top models, including Crawford, Turlington, Campbell, Evangelista, Claudia Schiffer, and Niki Taylor, by first name only. In 1995 Crawford appeared in a major advertising campaign for PepsiCo, Inc., and was named the top-earning model in the world by the U.S.…surah,  chapter in the sacred scripture of Islam, the Qurʾān. Each of the 114 surahs, which vary in length from several pages to several words, encompasses one or more revelations received by Muhammad from Allah (God). Traditional Muslim classification qualifies each surah as either Makkiyyah ("of Mecca") or Madaniyyah ("of Medina"). According to some Muslim scholars, these labels indicate whether the surah was revealed to Muhammad while he was preaching in one or the other of those cities. In some cases an intermixture of verses is similarly designated; modern critical scholarship, however, does not accept the validity of these divisions. Except for the first surah, the fātiḥah (Arabic, "opening"), which is a brief seven verses, the surahs are arranged in descending order of length and are numbered serially. They are further identified by a name, usually derived from an unusual image appearing in the text but not necessarily indicative of the general content. About one-fourth of the surahs are also preceded by the fawātiḥ; these are detached letters, the function and meaning of which remain undetermined.

Every surah but the ninth opens with the basmalah formula ("in the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful") and is followed by numbered verses (āyahs). Written in prose, much of which is of a highly intense quality and is often rhymed, the individual āyahs, rather than the entire surah, are commonly regarded as proofs of God’s authority and existence and a validation of Muhammad’s mission. Indeed, all the surahs-except the fātiḥah, which is a short devotional prayer, and the last two surahs-are in the form of an address from God, either speaking himself in the first person or speaking through the imperative form qul ("say!") and ordering that the words that follow be proclaimed. The subject matter of the revelations is varied, ranging from stories of previous prophets (Abraham, Moses, Jesus) to an extremely vivid eschatology. The general tone is deeply moralistic and theocentric, reverberating with a demand for obedience to a transcendent but compassionate God.

In pious circles the Qurʾān is often divided into 30 equal sections known as ajzāʾ (singular juzʾ; Persian and Urdu sipāra, or pāra). These break up the surahs arbitrarily, without regard to content, into 30 parts in order to facilitate the systematic reading of the entire Qurʾān in 30 days, or one lunar month.…approach in his eight-volume treatise, System des heutigen römischen Rechts (1840–49; "System of Modern Roman Law"), a detailed analysis of Roman law as it evolved in modern Europe. This work also contained his system of international private law.…large part the history of tackle, as the equipment for fishing is called.ṭallit,  prayer shawl worn by male Jews during the daily morning service (shaḥarit); it is also worn by the leader of the service during the afternoon service (minḥa). On Yom Kippur, males wear it for all five services and on Tisha be-Av only during the afternoon service.

Rectangular in shape, the wool (or sometimes silk) shawl has black or blue stripes with fringes (tzitzit) affixed to the four corners as the Bible prescribes (Numbers 15:38). Two fringes fall in front, two behind. Often an embroidered collar is added, inscribed with the blessing to be recited when the ṭallit is put on. A pious Jew is often buried in his ṭallit after one of the fringes has been removed.Tarasco,  Indian people of northern Michoacán state in central Mexico. The area in which the Tarasco live is one of high volcanic plateaus and lakes; the climate is arid and cool. The Tarascan people are undergoing a slow process of assimilation into the mainstream mestizo culture of Mexico, but there are still people primarily monolingual in the Tarascan language and culturally conservative.

The Tarasco are basically agricultural, growing the Middle American staple crops-corn (maize), beans, and squash-and raising livestock-primarily sheep, hogs, and chickens. Field cultivation is by means of the plow or digging stick. A number of nonstaple crops are also grown for livestock food, for cash, and for variety in the diet. Fishing, hunting, trading, and wage labour are other activities of economic significance. Settlements are generally villages with farmlands surrounding them. Houses are of wood, stone, or adobe, with tile or shingle roofs. Among crafts practiced by the Tarasco are woodworking, weaving, pottery, mat making, net weaving, embroidering, and sewing (see photograph). Craft specialization by village is the general rule. Traditional dress is disappearing among the Tarasco; most men wear denim work clothes and may have dark trousers, wool jackets, and felt hats for special occasions. Many women wear cotton housedresses, and even the traditional costume is much modified from the pre-Columbian skirt and huipil (overblouse, or tunic).

An important social institution is the compadrazgo, an institution of ritual kinship based on godparenthood, common in Middle America; in an elaborate form, it is widely seen among the Tarasco. The Tarasco are Roman Catholics, and although they practice the standard folk Catholicism of Middle America, emphasizing patron saints and fiestas, their Christianity is remarkably little influenced by pre-Columbian indigenous religion; they do not believe in gods, demons, or witches.

The Tarascan language is not known to be related to any other.…eastern or Siberian dialects, Kasimov, Tepter (Teptyar), and Astrakhan and Ural Tatar. Kazan Tatar is the literary language.
…Araucanians in the epic poem La Araucana (1569–89). This work is known as the "Aeneid of the Chileans."Grau’s first book, The Black Prince, and Other Stories (1955), had considerable success. Her first novel, The Hard Blue Sky (1958), concerns Cajun fishermen and their families. This was followed by The House on Coliseum Street (1961), which examines the lives of a mother and her five daughters,…Kahn, Crane completed The Bridge. Inspired in part by the Brooklyn Bridge and standing for the creative power of man uniting the present and the past, the poem has 15 parts and is unified by a structure modeled after that of the symphony.…of essays Zniewolony umysł (1953; The Captive Mind), in which he condemned the accommodation of many Polish intellectuals to communism. This theme is also present in his novel Zdobycie władzy (1955; The Seizure of Power). His poetic works are noted for their classical style and their preoccupation with philosophical and…, prison, he wrote The Caroline Almanack, expressing his disillusionment with U.S. politics.The Cherry Orchard,  drama in four acts written by Anton Chekhov as Vishnyovy sad. Chekhov’s final play, it was first performed and published in 1904. Though Chekhov insisted that the play was "a comedy, in places even a farce," playgoers and readers often find a touch of tragedy in the decline of the charming Ranevskaya family.

Madame Ranevskaya, who has spent five years in Paris to escape grief over her young son’s death, returns to her home in Russia ridden with debt. She is obliged to decide how to dispose of her family’s estate, with its beautiful and famous cherry orchard. The coarse but wealthy merchant Ermolai Lopakhin suggests that Mme Ranevskaya develop the land on which the orchard sits. Eventually Lopakhin purchases the estate and proceeds with his plans for a housing development. As the unhappy Ranevskayas leave the estate, the sound of saws can be heard in the orchard.Venice’s first project was The Courtship of Eddie’s Father (1963), a light romantic comedy about a widower (Ford) whose exuberant son (Ron Howard) helps him choose between three prospective stepmothers (Shirley Jones, Dina Merrill, and Stella Stevens).…the Academy Award-winning animated short The Critic (1963), a devastating lampoon of avant-garde films. He and Buck Henry then created Get Smart (1965–70), a television situation comedy spoofing the espionage genre popularized by the James Bond films.…Le Diable au corps (1923; The Devil in the Flesh), which remains a unique expression of the poetry and perversity of an adolescent boy’s love.…called Oeconomia Regni Animalis (1740–41; The Economy of the Animal Kingdom), and in November 1740 he was back in Stockholm.…l’amour et du hasard (1730; The Game of Love and Chance) display typical characteristics of his love comedies: romantic settings, an acute sense of nuance and the finer shades of feeling, and deft and witty wordplay. This verbal preciousness is still known as marivaudage and reflects the sensitivity and sophistication……of a fictionalized Hollywood biography, The Gene Krupa Story (1959), which featured Sal Mineo as Krupa and Krupa’s own drumming on the sound track.…from the 1840s to 1916; The Haj (1984), depicting the lives of Palestinian Arabs from World War I to the Suez war of 1956; and A God in Ruins (1999), a novel about a U.S. presidential candidate who discovers he is actually Jewish. Uris was noted for extensively researching his…Pangloss, the elderly pedant in The Heir at Law (first performed 1797), is his only outstanding comic creation. But the comic opera Two to One (1784), his first success; the quasi-operatic Inkle and Yarico (1787); the melodramas The Battle of Hexham (1789) and The Iron Chest (1796), the latter based…He began publishing The Hobby Horse in 1882, the first finely printed magazine on art. A friend of Morris, he was a founding member of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings and was active in several organizations.…in Disney’s live-action remake of The Little Mermaid. In addition, she portrayed a feisty police officer and the love interest to Dracula’s henchman (played by Nicholas Hoult) in the romantic comedy horror spoof Renfield (2023).…of his tweedy protagonist in The Lost Symbol (2009; TV series 2021), which centres on Freemasons, and Inferno (2013), which saw Langdon following clues related to Dante’s poem The Divine Comedy in an effort to stop the release of a plague. The latter book was also adapted for the big…His second, Les Amants (1958; The Lovers), was a commercial success and established Malle and its star, Jeanne Moreau, in the film industry. The film’s lyrical love scenes, tracked with exquisite timing, exhibit Malle’s typically bold and uninhibited treatment of sensual themes. Social alienation and isolation was the subject of……1818, Bowdich wrote and published The Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee (1819), the earliest European account of the Asante at the height of their power and splendour; the work is still considered a classic in the field. His further criticism of the practices of the African Company led……idealized Elizabethan golden age (The Muses Elizium, 1630). Nostalgia was a dangerous quality under the progressive and absolutist Stuarts; the taste for Spenser involved a respect for values-traditional, patriotic, and Protestant-that were popularly, if erroneously, linked with the Elizabethan past but thought to be disregarded by the new regime.…The Painted Veil (1934) starred Greta Garbo as a neglected wife who embarks on an affair with a diplomat in China.
…people to go forward, The People, Yes (1936). The folk songs he sang before delighted audiences were issued in two collections, The American Songbag (1927) and New American Songbag (1950). He wrote the popular biography Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years, 2 vol. (1926), and Abraham Lincoln: The War Years, 4…The Prince,  political treatise by Niccolò Machiavelli, written in 1513.

A short treatise on how to acquire power, create a state, and keep it, The Prince represents Machiavelli’s effort to provide a guide for political action based on the lessons of history and his own experience as a foreign secretary in Florence. His belief that politics has its own rules so shocked his readers that the adjectival form of his surname, Machiavellian, came to be used as a synonym for political maneuvers marked by cunning, duplicity, or bad faith.

Machiavelli referred to his treatise as De Principatibus ("Of Principalities") while writing it, and it circulated in manuscript form during the 1510s. When it was first published in 1532, five years after Machiavelli had died, it carried the title Il Principe ("The Prince").In The Queen of the Air (1869) he attempted to express his old concept of a divine power in Nature in new terms calculated for an age in which assent to the Christian faith was no longer automatic or universal. Through an account of the Greek……Caucasus, including "Nabeg" (1853; "The Raid") and his three sketches about the Siege of Sevastopol during the Crimean War: "Sevastopol v dekabre mesyatse" ("Sevastopol in December"), "Sevastopol v maye" ("Sevastopol in May"), and "Sevastopol v avguste 1855 goda" ("Sevastopol in August"; all published 1855–56). The first sketch, which deals…Les Racines du ciel (1956; The Roots of Heaven), winner of the Prix Goncourt, balances a visionary conception of freedom and justice against a pessimistic comprehension of man’s cruelty and greed. Other works by Gary include Le Grand Vestiare (1948; The Company of Men), a novel set in postwar Paris;…The Signal Companies, Inc.,  former American conglomerate corporation engaged mostly in automotive and aerospace engineering, energy development, and environmental improvement. It became part of AlliedSignal in 1985.

The company was incorporated in 1928 as the Signal Oil and Gas Company to continue the business of Signal Gas Company. Within a few months it became involved in the production side of the petroleum industry. It assumed the name Signal Companies, Inc., in 1968.

Over the years the company grew through acquisition into a highly sophisticated technological concern. In 1964 it entered the aerospace field by acquiring Garrett Corporation, which manufactured engines, control systems, and other aircraft and missile components used on nearly all U.S. commercial and military aircraft of the time. In 1975 the company acquired a controlling interest in UOP Inc. (formerly Universal Oil Products Company), which produced environmental control systems and provided technology for the petroleum-refining and petrochemical industries. Signal’s other subsidiaries included Dunham-Bush, manufacturer of refrigerating and cooling equipment, Ampex Corporation, a manufacturer of audio and video, data-memory, and magnetic-tape products, and Wheelabrator-Frye, an engineering and construction concern.…Maske family also appear in Der Snob (published and performed 1914), 1913 (published 1915 and performed 1919), and Das Fossil (published 1925 and performed 1923), the four plays forming the Maske Tetralogy. The plays portray the family as self-indulgent social climbers masked by bourgeois propriety. Sternheim’s later plays were less…
The Song of Bernadette,  novel by Czech-born writer Franz Werfel, published in 1941 in German as Das Lied von Bernadette. The book is based on the true story of a peasant girl of Lourdes, France, who had visions of the Virgin Mary. It was written to fulfill the vow Werfel had made in Lourdes in 1940, while trying to escape the Nazis: if he and his wife reached safety in the United States, he would write the story of Bernadette of Lourdes, who was canonized in 1933.

In the novel, Bernadette’s visions begin in 1858, when a beautiful lady claiming to be the Virgin Mary appears to her at a grotto. News of the apparition and Bernadette’s subsequent visitations invoke disbelief by the townspeople, harassment by civil officials, and skepticism by the clergy. After the Virgin causes roses to bloom in winter and reveals to Bernadette a previously unknown spring of water, both church and government accept the truth of Bernadette’s revelations.…drama Az ember tragediája (1861; The Tragedy of Man). He is often considered Hungary’s greatest philosophical poet.Pink’s sixth studio album, The Truth About Love (2012), included the hit singles "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" and "Try." Also on that album was "Just Give Me a Reason," which Pink recorded with Nate Ruess from the group Fun. Pink subsequently collaborated with singer and songwriter Dallas Green… In 1749 Johnson published The Vanity of Human Wishes, his most impressive poem as well as the first work published with his name. It is a panoramic survey of the futility of human pursuit of greatness and happiness. Like London,… Academy Award-nominated documentary film The War Room (1993) and acted in television programs and movies, often as a fictionalized version of himself-as in the HBO series K Street (2003)-but occasionally in other roles in films such as The People vs. Larry Flynt (1996) and The Assassination of Jesse James……published his most important work, Théorie élémentaire de la botanique, in which he contended that plant anatomy, not physiology, must be the sole basis of classification, for which he coined the term taxonomy. After introducing the concept of homologous parts (of common ancestry, although different in structure) for plants as…In 1983 Hillis cofounded the Thinking Machines Corporation to design, build, and market such multiprocessor computers. In 1985 the first of his Connection Machines, the CM-1 (quickly replaced by its more commercial successor, the CM-2), was introduced. The CM-1 utilized an astonishing 65,536 inexpensive one-bit processors, grouped 16 to a…Three on a Couch (1966) cast him as an artist trying to woo a psychiatrist (Janet Leigh); The Big Mouth (1967) saw him searching for treasure; and Which Way to the Front? (1970) was a World War II comedy. He also directed the comic mystery…The Tiszalök Dam (1954) on the river’s upper course forms the largest reservoir in Hungary, provides hydroelectric power, and, with the Eastern Main Canal linking the Tisza and the Berettyö to the Körös, supplies year-round irrigation water to the Hajdúság and Hortobágy plains. The Tisza is…Toots and the Maytals,  highly popular Jamaican vocal ensemble of the 1960s and ’70s, regarded as one of the great early reggae groups. The members were Toots Hibbert (original name Frederick Hibbert; b. December 8, 1942, Maypen, Jamaica-d. September 11, 2020, Kingston), Nathaniel ("Jerry") Matthias (or McCarthy; b. c. 1945, Jamaica), and Henry ("Raleigh") Gordon (b. c. 1945, Jamaica).

Formed in 1962 as a ska group fronted by the charismatic Hibbert, the Maytals (originally known as the Vikings, then as the V. Maytals) quickly became the top group in Jamaica on the strength of Hibbert’s hearty, exuberant vocals, often compared to those of Otis Redding. In 1968, with Leslie Kong as the producer, the Maytals released their first recording in the emerging style of reggae, "54-46 (That’s My Number)." A pumping, frantic account of Hibbert’s term in prison on a marijuana charge, it is considered one of reggae’s greatest songs. Subsequent hits included "Do the Reggay" (thought to be the first explicit use of the term), "Monkey Man," "Funky Kingston," "Sweet and Dandy," and "Pressure Drop." The last two songs were included in the landmark film The Harder They Come (1972), which helped bring the group international renown. Unlike Bob Marley and the Wailers, the Maytals’ music is largely apolitical, upbeat, and full of unabashedly joyous singing.

In 1982 Hibbert became a solo performer; his subsequent forays into nonreggae styles failed to capture a mainstream audience outside Jamaica. He convened a new lineup of Toots and the Maytals in the early 1990s, however, and resumed his focus on reggae. True Love (2004)-a collection of their hits recorded in duet with such stars as Bonnie Raitt, Eric Clapton, and the Roots-won a Grammy Award for best reggae album, though critics preferred Light Your Light (2007). Toots and the Maytals continued touring through the 2010s.…career, including the landmark textbook Topology (1935), which was the first and only volume of an intended multivolume collaboration with Swiss mathematician Heinz Hopf.…theory of mental illness in Traité des maladies mentales (1860; "A Treatise on Mental Illness"), in which he coined the term demence-precoce to refer to mental degeneration.Tribune Tower,  Gothic Revival 36-floor office building, located at 435 N. Michigan Ave., in downtown Chicago, which opened in 1925 as headquarters for the Chicago Tribune.

 In 1922, on the occasion of its 75th anniversary, the newspaper announced an international competition for a new downtown headquarters. The competition sought "for Chicago, the most beautiful building in the world," and it offered $100,000 in prize money, $50,000 to the winner. Although the competition attracted more than 260 entries from 23 countries, most of the designs emanated from the U.S. and Europe. Most American entries understood the profitability of the site and maximized the amount of rentable office space in their designs. Many of the European entries, however, sacrificed business practicality for a more monumental form. Austrian architect Adolf Loos, for example, proposed a giant Doric column, which may have been a pun on the columns printed in the newspaper. Italian architect Saverio Dioguardi proposed a large classical arch resembling the  Arc de Triomphe in Paris. However, the winning entry-designed by New York architects Raymond Hood and John Mead Howells-filled the permitted occupiable building envelope with floor after floor of office space within a structural steel frame.

Hood and Howells’ winning Gothic Revival tower used architectural ideas borrowed from the past. The lower office block is sheathed in Indiana limestone with vertical piers and horizontal spandrels characteristic of Art Deco; embedded in its walls are stones from historic monuments and battlefields from around the world-including Bunker Hill, Omaha Beach, Westminster Abbey, St. Peter’s Basilica, the Forbidden City, and the Kremlin. The building’s crown recalls a Medieval European tower, imitating the Butter Tower of the 13th-century Rouen Cathedral in France. Inside, visitors encounter a Hall of Inscriptions. Carved into the lobby walls are quotations from Benjamin Franklin, Voltaire, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, praising and exalting freedom of the press.

While some critics had hoped the winning design would point toward the future of American architecture, Hood and Howells’ design appealed to the newspaper owners’ sense of nostalgia, history, and moral purpose. The architects even inserted some playful elements into the design, including, at the center of the building’s three-story entry arch, carved stone depictions of Robin Hood and a baying dog, punning visually on their last names. The Tribune Tower is one of four towers, along with the Wrigley Building and two buildings across the Chicago River, that frame the Michigan Avenue Bridge, all built in the 1920s and considered to be among the most iconic and important architectural compositions in the downtown area.…being the instigator of the Argentine Anticommunist Alliance, one of the first right-wing death squads to be formed in Argentina in the 1970s. On July 11 he resigned and left for Spain after having been hurriedly designated ambassador extraordinary by Isabel Perón. At year’s end, under pressure from the military,…Tristan and Isolde,  principal characters of a famous medieval love-romance, based on a Celtic legend (itself based on an actual Pictish king). Though the archetypal poem from which all extant forms of the legend are derived has not been preserved, a comparison of the early versions yields an idea of its content.

The central plot of the archetype must have been roughly as follows:

The young Tristan ventures to Ireland to ask the hand of the princess Isolde for his uncle, King Mark of Cornwall, and, having slain a dragon that is devastating the country, succeeds in his mission. On the homeward journey Tristan and Isolde, by misadventure, drink the love potion prepared by the queen for her daughter and King Mark. Henceforward, the two are bound to each other by an imperishable love that dares all dangers and makes light of hardships but does not destroy their loyalty to the king.

The greater part of the romance is occupied by plot and counterplot: Mark and the courtiers seeking to entrap the lovers, who escape the snares laid for them until finally Mark gets what seems proof of their guilt and resolves to punish them. Tristan, on his way to the stake, escapes by a miraculous leap from a chapel on the cliffs and rescues Isolde, whom Mark has given to a band of lepers. The lovers flee into the forest of Morrois and remain there until one day Mark discovers them asleep with a naked sword between them. Soon afterward they make peace with Mark, and Tristan agrees to restore Isolde to Mark and leave the country. Coming to Brittany, Tristan marries Isolde of the White Hands, daughter of the duke, "for her name and her beauty," but makes her his wife only in name. Wounded by a poisoned weapon, he sends for the other Isolde, who alone can heal him. If she agrees to come, the ship on which she embarks is to have a white sail; if she refuses, a black. His jealous wife, who has discovered his secret, seeing the ship approach on which Isolde is hastening to her lover’s aid, tells him that it carries a black sail. Tristan, turning his face to the wall, dies, and Isolde, arriving too late to save her love, yields up her life in a final embrace. A miracle follows their deaths: two trees grow out of their graves and intertwine their branches so that they can not be parted by any means.

The archetypal poem, which has not survived, seems to have been a grim and violent work containing episodes of a coarse and even farcical character. Two adaptations, made in the late 12th century, preserved something of its barbarity. About 1170, however, the Anglo-Norman poet Thomas, who was probably associated with the court of Henry II of England, produced an adaptation in which the harshness of the archetype was considerably softened. A mellifluous German version of Thomas’ adaptation, by Gottfried von Strassburg, is considered the jewel of medieval German poetry. Short episodic poems telling of Tristan’s surreptitious visits to Isolde at King Mark’s court appeared in the late 12th century. Of these, the most important are two versions of the Folie Tristan, in which Tristan is disguised as a fool, and the Luite Tristan, in which he appears as a minstrel. During the 13th century the story-like Arthurian legend-was embodied in a voluminous prose romance. In this, Tristan figured as the noblest of knights, and King Mark as a base villain, the whole being grafted onto Arthurian legend and bringing Tristan and King Arthur’s knight Sir Lancelot into rivalry. This version, which recounts innumerable chivalric adventures of a conventional type, had superseded all other French versions by the end of the European Middle Ages, and it was in this form that Sir Thomas Malory knew the legend in the late 15th century, making it part of his Le Morte Darthur. A popular romance in English, Sir Tristrem, dates from approximately 1300 and is one of the first poems written in the vernacular.

Renewed interest in the legend during the 19th century followed upon discovery of the old poems. Richard Wagner’s opera Tristan und Isolde (first performed in 1865) was inspired by the German poem of Gottfried von Strassburg.South of the Save, Tsonga is spoken by almost one-seventh of the population.
UFJ Holdings, Inc.,  Japanese bank holding company that became one of the world’s largest banking institutions through the merger of Sanwa Bank, Tōkai Bank, and Tōyō Trust in 2001. With headquarters in Ōsaka, UFJ operates banks, issues credit cards, provides venture capital funding, and offers other banking and financial management services.…2004 Harvey released the self-produced Uh Huh Her, on which she played all the instruments except percussion and continued her unique discourse on love, which from all indications had again turned bad for her. In 2006 Harvey’s live radio performances for renowned disc jockey and alternative tastemaker John Peel were……in 1955, three years later Unity for National Progress (Unité pour le Progrès National; UPRONA) was established in Burundi. In 1959 the mwami was made a constitutional monarch in Burundi.
University of Akron,  public, coeducational institution of higher learning in Akron, Ohio, U.S. While the university is known for its research in polymer engineering and science, it also offers a curriculum of liberal arts, business, and education courses, including master’s degree programs. Doctoral degrees are available in a number of fields, including sociology, urban studies, polymer science and engineering, education, engineering, and chemistry. The school of law opened in 1959, and the nursing school opened in 1967.

Originally named Buchtel College after its chief early benefactor, John R. Buchtel, the university was established in 1870 by the Ohio Universalist Convention and opened in 1872. The denominational affiliation was dropped in 1913 when the city took ownership of the school and changed its name to Municipal University of Akron. In 1967 it became a state university. In response to the growth of the city’s rubber industry, the university offered the first collegiate course in rubber chemistry in 1909. It was also one of the first universities to offer cooperative engineering education programs, sending students out to work in local factories. Wayne College, a junior college open since 1972, is affiliated with the University of Akron.University of London,  federation of British institutions of higher learning, located primarily in London, that includes 19 virtually autonomous colleges, 10 separate institutes known collectively as the School of Advanced Study, an institute in Paris, and a marine biological station. The university also examines and grants degrees to students not enrolled in any of its constituent schools.

The university was a product of the Liberal movement of the 19th century. Following a call by poet Thomas Campbell in 1825 for a university to provide education for the class between the "mechanics" and the "enormously rich," liberals and religious dissenters founded London University (now University College) in 1826; instruction began in 1828. Its application for a royal charter was refused because the college admitted Roman Catholics, Jews, and other non-Anglicans. In 1829 King’s College was founded under Anglican auspices, but its charter was blocked by the dissenters. In 1836 the University of London was created as an administrative entity that would hold no classes of its own but would examine and confer degrees on students of the other two colleges. Under the Supplemental Charter of 1849, it became possible for students enrolled in any institution of higher learning anywhere in the British Empire to be examined by the university and awarded a University of London degree. Students from institutions as different as the University of Oxford and the Working Men’s College of London thereby could become recipients of London degrees. In 1858 students who were not enrolled in any institution were allowed to become degree candidates. The first female students were admitted in 1878.

By the early 20th century many other institutions had become affiliated with the university, including the London School of Economics and Political Science, founded in 1895 and now an internationally respected centre for the study of social science; the expansive Institute of Education, founded in 1902; and the highly respected School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), founded in 1916.

In 1900 the university was authorized to begin offering its own courses. Students attending the university or its affiliated schools were dubbed "internal students"; those who sat for university examinations but were enrolled elsewhere were "external students." During World War II, most of the city’s colleges were temporarily moved elsewhere in the United Kingdom, and the Senate House-the university’s administrative building-was occupied by the Ministry of Information. Enrollment expanded significantly in the 1960s and ’70s because of the increased number of residents pursuing higher education. During the 1990s, individual colleges became more autonomous and took on many of the university’s central administrative duties. In May 2008 it was announced that the university would open a department in Adelaide, South Australia, specializing in energy and resource management.U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,  executive division of the U.S. federal government responsible for carrying out government housing and community development programs. Established in 1965 under Pres. Lyndon B. Johnson, it ensures equal access to housing and community-based employment opportunities; finances new housing, public housing, and housing rehabilitation projects; insures mortgages; and carries out programs that serve the housing needs of low-income and minority families and the elderly, the disabled, and the mentally ill. It also protects consumers against fraudulent practices by land developers, ensures the safety of manufactured homes, and defends homebuyers against abusive mortgage-loan practices.Ustaša,  Croatian fascist movement that nominally ruled the Independent State of Croatia during World War II. In 1929, when King Alexander I tried to suppress the conflict between Croatian and Serbian political parties by imposing a personal dictatorial regime in Yugoslavia, Ante Pavelić, a former delegate to Parliament and an advocate of Croatian separatism, fled to Italy and formed the Ustaša ("Insurgence") movement. Dedicated to achieving Croatian independence from Yugoslavia, the ustaše modeled themselves on the Italian Fascists and founded terrorist training centres in Italy and Hungary. To foment political crises in Yugoslavia, the Ustaša’s members attempted to incite a peasant rebellion in northern Dalmatia in 1932 and participated in the assassination of King Alexander in 1934 at Marseille.

The Ustaša achieved its goal after the Axis powers invaded and partitioned Yugoslavia in April 1941. Pavelić then returned to Croatia and, under the sponsorship of the Italians, formed the government of a Croatian state that had been expanded to include some of Serbia and all of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Ustaša also conscripted an army to join the Axis powers and to fight the resistance movements that were beginning to operate in the Yugoslav lands. To make their state more purely Croatian, the ustaše set about exterminating its Serb, Jewish, and Gypsy inhabitants with a brutality that shocked even the Germans and occasionally obliged the Italians to intervene. Although many Yugoslavs reacted to their brutality by joining the resistance movements, the Ustaša remained in control of Croatia until May 1945, when the German army protecting them collapsed and Pavelić and his supporters fled before the communist Partisans. Vaishnavism,  one of the major forms of modern Hinduism, characterized by devotion to the god Vishnu and his incarnations (avatars). A devotee of Vishnu is called a Vaishnava. The devotional Vaishnava literature that emerged in Sanskrit and in vernacular writings from the 10th through the 16th century continues to be a part of Vaishnava worship, though it is often supplemented by later philosophical and narrative texts, both written and oral.

For Vaishnavas, absolute reality (brahman) is manifested in Vishnu, who in turn is incarnated in Rama, Krishna, and other avatars; the ten primary avatars of Vishnu are called the Dashavatara. Through his avatars, Vishnu defends traditional righteousness in keeping with the moral law (dharma). The most popular of the avatars are Rama and Krishna. Rama is often depicted in Hindu art and literature with his consort Sita. Krishna manifests his true identity as Vishnu to his warrior friend Arjuna in the Bhagavadgita, but he is often portrayed as a handsome youth in the company of Radha or other gopis (milkmaids).

The various sects of worshippers of Vishnu pray to him in different ways. For some, the goal of religious devotion (bhakti) to Vishnu is liberation (moksha) from the cycle of birth and death (samsara). For others, it is health and prosperity in this life, good crops, success in business, or thriving children. Most Vaishnavas hope to spend eternity in Vishnu’s presence after death.

Vaishnavism comprises many sects and groups that differ in their interpretation of the relationship between the individual and God. The Srivaishnava sect, for example, emphasizes the doctrine of vishishtadvaita ("qualified nondualism") of Ramanuja, according to which, although the differentiated phenomenal world is illusory (maya), it is nevertheless the medium through which devotees may gain access to God. Another group professes the dvaita ("dualism") of the philosopher Madhva, the belief that God and the soul are separate entities and that the soul’s existence is dependent on God. The Pushtimarg sect maintains the shuddhadvaita ("pure nondualism") doctrine of the theologian Vallabhacharya, which does not declare the phenomenal world to be an illusion. The Gaudiya sect, founded by Chaitanya, teaches achintya-bhedabheda ("inconceivable duality and nonduality"), the belief that the relation between God and the world is beyond the scope of human comprehension. In addition to these philosophical sects, many other Vaishnava groups are scattered throughout India, often centred in local temples or shrines.Venda,  a Bantu-speaking people inhabiting the region of the Republic of South Africa known from 1979 to 1994 as the Republic of Venda. The area is now part of Limpopo province, and is situated in the extreme northeastern corner of South Africa, bordering on southern Zimbabwe. The Venda have been called a "composite people" because they have historically consisted of a multiplicity of culturally different groups. Apparently the Venda have become more culturally uniform since they settled in their present location after migrating through Zimbabwe from an area farther to the northwest, and almost all now speak the Venda language.

Much of the Venda’s countryside in the south features mountains and wide valleys that receive abundant rainfall and are both densely populated and agriculturally productive. The northern area has a hot, dry climate and flat grasslands suitable for stock raising. The rugged Venda habitat was largely responsible for protecting them from invading enemies in the 19th century. Zulu warriors led by Mzilikazi, the eventual founder of the Ndebele (Matabele) people, generally met defeat in their attacks on the inaccessible mountain fortresses of the Venda. The Venda were, in fact, the last of the peoples in the area to come under European control.

Since the era of raids more Venda villages have been situated on the plains, and individual villages no longer need to be nearly self-contained. Agriculture dominates the Venda economy. The principal crops are corn (maize), peanuts (groundnuts), beans, peas, sorghum, and vegetables, and the planting season starts around October. The Venda may have been primarily herders in the past. During the 20th century their cattle holdings-especially the herds of their chiefs-increased from a few to an appreciable number; they also keep goats, sheep, pigs, and fowl.

The Venda chiefs are traditionally custodians of the land for their people, while local headmen permit household groups to occupy and work tracts of land. Lineages of kinsmen, with membership based on patrilineal descent, are used to reckon inheritance and succession. Cattle are given as bridewealth by a groom in a custom called lobola. Matrilineal descent is also observed by the Venda, especially in the religious practice of the ancestor cult. Ancestral spirits, including those of chiefs, are among those thought to inhabit the Venda countryside. Ralu Vhimba is the deity traditionally recognized.In 1950 he established Victor Gruen Associates, a firm composed of professionals from all fields of engineering, architecture, and planning, and turned his attention to solving problems of modern urban areas for mass population. Besides Northland, his significant shopping centres include Southdale (Minneapolis, Minn.), Randhurst (Mount Prospect, Ill.), and……a so-called election for a People’s Congress was held in the Soviet occupation zone in May 1949. But instead of choosing among candidates, voters were allowed only the choice of approving or rejecting-usually in less-than-secret circumstances-"unity lists" of candidates drawn from all parties, as well as representatives of mass organizations…
wake,   watch or vigil held over the body of a dead person before burial and sometimes accompanied by festivity; also, in England, a vigil kept in commemoration of the dedication of the parish church. The latter type of wake consisted of an all-night service of prayer and meditation in the church. These services, officially termed Vigiliae by the church, appear to have existed from the earliest days of Anglo-Saxon Christianity. Each parish kept the morrow of its vigil as a holiday. Wakes soon degenerated into fairs; people from neighbouring parishes journeyed over to join in the merrymaking, and the revelry and drunkenness became a scandal. The days usually chosen for church dedications being Sundays and saints’ days, the abuse seemed all the more scandalous. In 1445 Henry VI attempted to suppress markets and fairs on Sundays and holy days.

Side by side with these church wakes there existed the custom of "holding a wake over" a corpse. The custom, as far as England was concerned, seems to have been older than Christianity and to have been at first essentially Celtic. Doubtless it had a superstitious origin, the fear of evil spirits hurting or even removing the body. The Anglo-Saxons called the custom lich-wake, or like-wake (from Anglo-Saxon lic, a corpse). With the introduction of Christianity, the offering of prayer was added to the vigil. As a rule, the corpse, with a plate of salt on its breast, was placed under the table, on which was liquor for the watchers. These private wakes soon tended to become drinking orgies. With the Reformation and the consequent disuse of prayers for the dead, the custom of waking became obsolete in England but survived in Ireland. Many countries and peoples have a custom equivalent to waking, which, however, is distinct from funeral feasts.…a relatively large consumption of wealth for nonessential pleasures. There is, however, no absolute definition of luxury, for the conception is relative to both time and person. It is a commonplace of history that the luxuries of one generation may become the necessities of a later period; thus, no hard…Western Wall,  in the Old City of Jerusalem, a place of prayer and pilgrimage sacred to the Jewish people. It is the only remains of the retaining wall surrounding the Temple Mount, the site of the First and Second Temples of Jerusalem, held to be uniquely holy by the ancient Jews. The First Temple was destroyed by the Babylonians in 587–586 bce, and the Second Temple was destroyed by the Romans in 70 ce.

The authenticity of the Western Wall has been confirmed by tradition, history, and archaeological research; the wall dates from about the 2nd century bce, though its upper sections were added at a later date. Texts explaining the survival of the wall vary; one suggests that God saved this fragment for the Jewish people, while another holds that Titus left it as a painful reminder of the Roman defeat of Judea.

Because the wall now forms part of a larger wall that surrounds the Muslim Dome of the Rock and Al-Aqṣā Mosque, Jews and Arabs have frequently disputed control of the wall and, often, right of access to it. That conflict has been particularly heated since the Israeli government took full control of the Old City in the wake of the Six-Day War of June 1967.

As it is seen today, the Western Wall measures about 50 metres (160 feet) long and about 20 metres (60 feet) high; the wall, however, extends much deeper into the earth. Jewish devotions there date from the early Byzantine period and reaffirm the rabbinic belief that "the divine Presence never departs from the Western Wall." Jews lament the destruction of the Temple and pray for its restoration, and it has long been a custom to push slips of paper with wishes or prayers on them into the wall’s cracks. Such terms as Wailing Wall were coined by European travelers who witnessed the mournful vigils of pious Jews before the relic.

Arab and Jewish sources both confirm that, after the Arab capture of Jerusalem in 638, Jews led the conquerors to the site of the Holy Rock and Temple yard and helped clear away the debris.…1968, after the release of White Light/White Heat, an album of extraordinary proto-punk ferocity. The 1950s rhythm-and-blues balladry and pop classicism that subtly flavoured Reed’s songwriting blossomed on The Velvet Underground (1969) and Loaded (1970). But the strain of commercial failure led Reed to quit in August 1970. A version…… (1987), Art and Objecthood (1998), Why Photography Matters as Art as Never Before (2008), After Caravaggio (2016), and What Was Literary Impressionism? (2018).For many lovers of rock and roll, the station of choice was neither a local outlet nor a national network. It was something in between-WLAC, based in Nashville, Tennessee, which blasted 50,000 watts of varied programming, including plenty of rhythm and blues at night. In response to the contention that African Americans in rural areas of the South were still unserved by radio, the Federal Communications Commission granted WLAC permission to have one of the strongest signals in the country, provided that the station broadcast rhythm and blues.

Three white disc jockeys-John Richbourg, Gene Nobles, and Bill ("Hoss") Allen-brought fame to themselves and WLAC by playing rhythm and blues, at least partly in response to the requests of returning World War II veterans who had been exposed to the new music in other parts of the country. Nobles, who joined WLAC in 1943, was the host of The Midnight Special-just one of three programs he hosted on the station.  Randy Wood, owner of Randy’s Record Shop in Gallatin, Tennessee, parlayed sponsorship of Nobles’s show into a successful mail-order business that made it possible for him to establish the Dot record label. A native of Arkansas and a former carnival barker, Nobles pushed the limits of deejay decorum, assaulting his listeners with insults and double entendres. Nobles retired in 1972 and died in 1989.

Hoss Allen, who began at WLAC as a utility deejay, is known for giving James Brown’s "Please, Please, Please" its first airplay in 1956, spinning it, in fact, before it was an official release. The station had received a rough version of the song, and Allen, filling in one day for Nobles, tried it out and kept it on the air for two weeks. Nobles and Richbourg also played the record constantly, and the three shared credit for Brown’s first chart success.

Richbourg, better known as John R., was loud and clear-mainly because he broadcast late at night, when there were fewer signals competing with that of WLAC, and because he worked hard at selling his music. Off the air, he also acted as a music promoter and manager. It was on the air, however, that he made his mark, as he invariably opened his show, "Yeah! It’s the big John R., the blues man. Whoa! Have mercy, honey, have mercy, have mercy. John R., ’way down south in the middle of Dixie. I’m gonna spread a little joy. You stand still now and take it like a man, you hear me?" He left radio in 1973 and died in 1986.As the Dutch rose to preeminence in sea power during the 17th century, the early yacht became a pleasure craft used first by royalty and later by the burghers on the canals and the protected and unprotected waters of the Low Countries. Racing… …section of this book, the "Ynglinga saga," is of particular interest, for in it, Snorri described the descent of the kings of Norway from the royal house of Sweden, the Ynglingar, who, in their turn, were said to descend from gods. Snorri used such written sources as were available; he…
…in 125 bce of the Yuefu, or Music Bureau, which had been established at least a century earlier to collect songs and their musical scores. Besides temple and court compositions of ceremonial verse, this office succeeded in preserving a number of songs sung or chanted by the ordinary people, including…Yupiit,  Indigenous Arctic people traditionally residing in Siberia, St. Lawrence Island and the Diomede Islands in the Bering Sea and Bering Strait, and Alaska. They are culturally related to the Chukchi and Inuit, of Canada and Kalaallit Nunaat (Greenland). Although some anthropologists argue that the Yupiit are culturally distinct from the other Inuit peoples, the Yupiit have made a political decision to be designated as Inuit.

The traditional economic activity of the Yupiit was the hunting of sea mammals, especially seals, walrus, and, until the latter half of the 19th century, whales. Trade with the Russians developed at the end of the 19th century. The Yupiit also traded with neighbouring reindeer breeders and others. Some enterprising Yupiit specialized in trade and used their economic advantage to become village chiefs, with such functions as opening and closing the hunting season, helping to mediate quarrels, and deciding the times for trade journeys. Hunting methods included harpooning from shore or boats, spearing animals in land drives, and, later, the use of guns. Hunting fur-bearing animals, fishing, and collecting plant food were auxiliary activities. Kayaks (one-person closed skin boats), baidarkas (open flat-bottomed boats), and whaleboats provided coastal transportation; dog teams and sleds were used on land.

The Yupiit practiced shamanism and believed in benign and harmful spirits; the latter caused various misfortunes, especially illness. Certain animals and birds were (and still are) considered sacred and not to be harmed. Rituals, mainly connected with ensuring future success in hunting and with thanksgiving for past hunts, often included dramatic performances and dances. Women generally played an important part in religious rituals.…cast member on the series Zoey’s Extraordinary Playlist (2020–21), and she appeared in the companion movie Zoey’s Extraordinary Christmas (2021). Her other film credits included the holiday comedy Happiest Season (2020) and Guillermo del Toro’s film noir Nightmare Alley (2021).