

 The Sainsbury family (also Lord Sainsbury and family and incorrectly the Sainsbury's family) founded Sainsbury's , the UK's second-largest supermarket chain. Today, the family has many interests, including business, politics, philanthropy, arts, and sciences. 
 This article needs additional citations for verification . (October 2021)

 PRINCIPAL MEMBERS OF THE SAINSBURY FAMILY


 Principal members of the founding family of the UK supermarket chain Sainsbury's  are:
     of the Sainsbury's  supermarket chain     of John James Sainsbury and co-founder of the Sainsbury's     supermarket chain         of John James and Mary Ann Sainsbury             (1902–1998), eldest son of John Benjamin Sainsbury, a Labour life peer         1962 as Lord Sainsbury, later joined the SDP        .                  KG  (1927–2022), eldest          son of Alan Sainsbury, a Conservative life peer  (Baron          Sainsbury of Preston Candover), married to former ballerina Anya Linden                               to Hon. Robert Butler-Sloss, son of Elizabeth Butler-Sloss, Baroness            Butler-Sloss                                    Alan Sainsbury, quiet philanthropist who gave away £100 million.           Entered into a civil partnership with          Stewart Grimshaw shortly before his death.                  (1932–), third son of Alan Sainsbury, former Tory          MP  and Minister, married to Susan Mary          Sainsbury (formerly Mitchell) (b. 1939)                     Conservative, later Labour, MP  The Rt Hon.             Shaun Woodward                                        Peter de Frankopan Subic Zrinski  (né Doimi de            Lupis)                 married name Paulette Anderson                               Benjamin Sainsbury, who, with his wife, Lisa (née Van den Bergh;        1912–2014),  began the collection of        modern and tribal art housed at the Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts         in Norwich  had issue:                 ]          (Elizabeth Clark 19 July 1938 – 14 August 1977), daughter of Robert          Sainsbury                     1964), son of Elizabeth Clark                     ]            (b. 25 February 1966), son of Elizabeth Clark                 (1940–), son of Robert Sainsbury, Labour life peer  (Baron          Sainsbury of Turville), who with his wife, Susan Carroll, The Lady          Sainsbury of Turville, DBE          , has issue:                     In The Playground, to help people understand Asperger syndrome                                   Blakey, had issue:                                   Kanabus, former director of the HIV/AIDS charity AVERT  and          later director of the charity GHE, has issue:                     Sainsbury, left fortune to Prince's Trust  to help            young people become established in farming                  
 FAMILY INVOLVEMENT IN SAINSBURY'S


 No family member works for the company, although John Davan Sainsbury  was the Life President of the firm at his death in 2022.
 The last family member to work for the company was Tim Sainsbury  who retired as a non-executive director in 1999.
 The last family chairman was David Sainsbury  who retired as chairman of the company in 1998. This brought to an end 129 years of management of the group by the Sainsbury family. As a government minister since 1998, his shares were held in a blind trust until 2007.

 FAMILY SHAREHOLDING IN SAINSBURY'S
 The equity interest in Sainsbury's held by the family as of May 2011 is 15%. The family sold down their stake from 35% in 2005. The largest family shareholders are Lord Sainsbury of Turville  with 4.99% and Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover , who controls just under 3% of the company, and benefits from 1.6% of the equity included in the above. The Sunday Times reported in September 2006 that "The Sainsbury family continues to  shares in the £6.2 billion retailer... and for the first time their combined holding has fallen below 20%.”
 The largest shareholder is the Qatar Investment Authority , the investment vehicle of the Qatari royal family of the Gulf Kingdom, who as of May 2011 holds 25.999% of the company.
 Lord Sainsbury of Preston Candover's decision to split his 3.89% holding in Sainsbury's between other members of his family in December 2006 suggests that the family may not have sold as many shares as previously thought. The other theory could be that the most senior members of the family, with previous stakes of over 3% (the reportable stock exchange shareholding threshold), could have simply transferred some of their shares to their children (who previously held few shares), rather than having sold shares onto the open market. However, some shares which have been sold were definitely sold to the open market (according to Miss Judith Portrait, the trustee for many Sainsbury family settlements).
 This fall from around 35% increases the possibility of any takeover attempt succeeding. However, the Sainsbury family have managed to use their remaining stake to block takeover bids in the past, as demonstrated by the two failed takeover bids in 2007. A hostile bid for the company may encounter difficulties, without the full support of the Sainsbury family. The halving of the generous dividend yield in recent years may have been a significant factor regarding the family's decision to reduce their shareholdings.

 BUILDINGS SET UP BY THE SAINSBURY FAMILY


 The Sainsbury family has also set up a number of buildings, to house their various interests. These are:
     Centre            (London)     University of Oxford                      in Cardiff      , Covent Garden           and Archaeology at the University of Oxford       quality of lives for people with mental health problems    
 THE SAINSBURY FAMILY CHARITABLE INTERESTS


 Eighteen of the grant-making trusts set up by members of the Sainsbury family, are known collectively as the Sainsbury Family Charitable Trusts.  Institutions whose creation they fostered include the following:
      of East Anglia , comprising:         Centre                          Africa, Oceania and the Americas                          to develop UK engineers into leaders in industry     independent charity to improve government effectiveness     quality of lives for people with mental health problems   Annabel Sainsbury (married name Annabel Kanabus) set up, with her husband, the international AIDS charity AVERT , and the charity GHE.  Adrian Kanabus has set up Adrians Charity.

 Celia Sainsbury (married name Celia Blakey) set up the Celia Blakey Charitable Trust which makes grants to various other charities.
 The Sainsbury family are also major benefactors to English Heritage  and the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty .
 In 2021 The Sunday Times  named the Sainsbury family among the most charitable people for the last 20 years with donations of £3.625 billion.  

 SAINSBURY FAMILY INTERESTS IN POLITICS


 The Sainsbury family also has varying political interests.
     originally a Liberal , but joined the Labour Party     in 1945 and sat on the party benches when appointed to    the House of Lords in 1962. He defected to become a founder member of the    Social Democratic Party  (SDP) in 1981, and    remained with the 'continuing' SDP faction    , led by David Owen ,    following the creation of the Liberal Democrats  in    1988.      took the Conservative     whip      also supported the SDP, but    has taken the Labour whip since 1997, and was Science and Innovation Minister    in the Blair government  (1998–2006)     for Hove, 1973–97     , who started as a Conservative but defected to Labour in    1999.